Comey fallout: Battle rages on Hill over Dem calls for special prosecutor

Top Senate Democrats and Republicans battled Wednesday in the aftermath of FBI Director James Comey’s firing over whether to appoint a special prosecutor to lead a new probe into Russian election meddling. 

In the face of renewed Democratic calls for such an appointment, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell argued against a special prosecutor Wednesday morning.

“Today, we’ll no doubt hear calls for a new investigation, which will only serve to impede the current work being done to not only discover what the Russians may have done [but] also to let this body and the national security community develop counter measures to see that it doesn’t happen again,” he said on the Senate floor. 

The Kentucky Republican also criticized Democrats for condemning the Comey firing, a decision supposedly prompted by the recommendation of Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein. 

McConnell said Democrats had “repeatedly criticized” Comey before and had “repeated praised Rosenstein,” confirmed by the Senate to the post just weeks ago.

Democrats suggest President Trump fired Comey because the FBI probe was digging up damaging information about Trump campaign connections with Russia in the 2016 White House race against Democrat Hillary Clinton.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., followed McConnell on the chamber floor on Wednesday to suggest the Russian investigation probes were indeed “getting too close to home.”

“What should happen now, what must happen, is that Mr. Rosenstein must appoint a special prosecutor,” the New York Democrat said. “If there was ever a circumstance that warranted a special prosecutor, it is now.

The partisan divide over a special prosecutor started almost immediately after the White House announced Tuesday evening that Comey was out, after a tumultuous roughly 10 months in which he twice opened -- and then closed -- investigations into Clinton emails sent and received on a private server system while she was secretary of State.

The mishandling of the email investigations was the basis of Rosenstein’s recommendation to dismiss Comey, according to his three-page memo to Attorney General Jeff Sessions.

Among the congressional Democrats also calling for a special prosecutor are California Sen. Dianne Feinstein.

“I plan to work … on the appointment of an independent prosecutor,” she said. “I will also support Deputy AG Rosenstein in the appointment of a special counsel who should be far removed from the politics of this place.”

South Carolina GOP Sen. Lindsey Graham said Wednesday: “You don't have a special prosecutor for a counter intelligence investigation. If it became a criminal investigation then we'd have a discussion.”