Who will replace James Comey? Rudy Giuliani says not him
Giuliani, one of Trump's top supporters, says he won't be the next FBI director, but White House staffers disagree

After President Trump shocked the country yesterday in his firing of FBI Director James Comey, there are numerous questions left unanswered. Perhaps the biggest question is: Who will Trump appoint as Comey’s replacement? Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani was seen at Trump Hotel in Washington D.C. hours after the bombshell announcement, and some are speculating he may be the successor.

Giuliani told reporters on Tuesday night that he was not a candidate for the position, according to the Atlantic. “I’m not a candidate for FBI director,” he stated. “The president’s not gonna ask me and I’m not gonna be FBI director.”

When asked if Giuliani would consider the position if Trump were to offer it to him, a key ally to Trump said, “He is not,” according to the Atlantic. Giuliani did however defend the president’s decision to terminate Comey effective immediately saying he thought Trump “made the right decision” and that “better leadership” in the FBI is needed.

“Jim is someone I regard as a friend, he worked for me for three years when I was U.S. attorney, but I feel like he made a number of bad judgments over the last year, and the president was correct in removing him and trying to get the FBI better leadership,” Giuliani said.

Amidst the fallout of the decision bipartisan concern was expressed, but Giuliani says it is because Trump is “treated quite unfairly.” When asked if he was meeting with Trump on Wednesday, he replied “If I am, I wouldn’t say it.” The reason the former mayor of New York City said he was in Washington was because he had “several business meetings, law firm meetings.” Adding, “I’ll be possibly I’ll be in the White House tomorrow.”

But Olivia Nuzzi, a reporter for New York Magazine who also spoke to Giuliani, tweeted that she learned Giuliani was being considered to lead the FBI.

Potential interim replacements for Comey will be interviewed by Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein on Wednesday, according to The Hill. Andrew McCabe, who is the acting FBI head, will be one of those who are interviewed. Four to eight candidates are expected to go through interviews, and an announcement about an interim director is expected to come as soon as Wednesday or Thursday.