Stranded in the New World: The Amazing Odyssey of Cabeza de Vaca

In 1528, a Spanish nobleman named Cabeza de Vaca was left stranded in what is now the southern United States following a disastrous exploring expedition. He and a dwindling group of companions would eventually wander Texas and Mexico for eight years, living among native tribes and undertaking a legendary trek across the Southwest to the Pacific Ocean. Along the way, they became the first group of Europeans to lay eyes on the wonders of the American continent.

Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca first arrived in the New World in 1528 as the royal treasurer on a Spanish voyage of discovery. When he finally left eight years later as one of the expedition’s sole survivors, he had walked across the American continent, made first contact with dozens of Indian tribes, and lived variously as a castaway, captive laborer, merchant and revered medicine man. “I wandered lost and miserable over many remote lands,” de Vaca wrote in recounting his incredible tale. “My hope of going out from those nations was always small; nevertheless, I made a point of remembering all the particulars, so that should God our Lord eventually please to bring me where I am now, I might testify to my exertion.”

Like all great survival stories, de Vaca’s odyssey began in disaster. In 1527, the nobleman and military veteran joined an exploring expedition led by a one-eyed conquistador named Pánfilo de Narváez. The group was tasked with conquering and colonizing a swath of the Florida Gulf Coast, but its mission got off to a rocky start after two of its ships sank in a hurricane off Cuba. When the rest of the explorers finally made landfall in April 1528 near what is now Tampa Bay, Florida, Narváez made a rash decision to split his forces and take 300 men on a search for gold in distant Indian settlements. He sent his ships away and made plans to meet up with them at a later date, but due to navigational errors, the rendezvous never occurred. Left alone, the overland party spent the next three months roaming the mosquito-infested coastline, battling Indians along the way. By late summer, 50 of them had perished from skirmishes as well as starvation and disease. The rest were forced to accept a grim reality: they were marooned in an alien land.

“It was a great sorrow and pain to see the necessity and hardship in which we found ourselves,” de Vaca wrote. “I refrain here from telling this at greater length, because one can imagine what could happen in a land so strange and so poor and so lacking in every single thing that it seemed impossible either to be in it or to escape from it.”

With their fleet nowhere in sight and their resources dwindling, the Spanish castaways resolved to test their luck on the open sea. After melting down their metal weapons to make nails and hatchets, they built five ramshackle rafts from tree logs. In September 1528, they set sail from the Florida panhandle with the hope of either drifting to Spanish settlements in Mexico or being rescued along the way. “And so greatly can necessity prevail,” de Vaca wrote, “that it made us risk going in this manner and placing ourselves in a sea so treacherous.”

The explorers skirted along the coast for the next several weeks, suffering from extreme thirst and hunger and risking ambush every time they ventured ashore. They managed to cross the mouth of the Mississippi River, but their tiny flotilla was later scattered by storms and beached at different points along the Gulf Coast. From there, the isolated crews met a variety of horrific fates. Dozens of men were killed in Indian raids, and several others resorted to cannibalism before dying of starvation. Narváez, meanwhile, disappeared after his raft was blown out to sea.

Cabeza de Vaca and some 80 other men washed ashore on an island near what is now Galveston, Texas. They received aid from the Capoques and Hans, two bands of nomadic natives, but only 15 of the explorers survived their first winter ashore. The rest dubbed the island “Malhado,” or “Misfortune.”