Top architect rounds on critics of Art Gallery of NSW expansion, Sydney Modern

A leading architect has challenged critics of Sydney Modern - the Art Gallery of NSW's $380 million expansion - saying they are sweating the "small stuff", and afraid of letting Sydney become "truly great".

Shaun Carter, the immediate past president of the Australian Institute of Architects NSW, urged critics to "get out of its road, and let a good public building be built".

"This is a city that will spend $20,000 to $30,000 a square metre on a private residence and nobody says boo," he argued. "And we hardly spend anything on public buildings [compared with overseas]," he said.

Mr Carter said the Opera House should be the minimum standard of excellence for public buildings of the future, from the biggest to the smallest, even toilet blocks.

"If you were to build an Opera House today, it would cost $3 billion yet it returns $2.4 billion to the Australian economy a year. If you deliver this for $500 million, it will return that money in single digit years," Mr Carter said.

His comments coincide with Wednesday's launch of a new book Culture Heist by Judith White, a former executive director of the Art Gallery Society of NSW. It calls for an open debate on Sydney Modern, arguing it is the only way to restore confidence in the nearly 150-year-old institution.

Ms White claims the "obsession with the grandiose Sydney Modern Project" has diminished the role of curators, and demoralised staff and volunteers.

"To go for the most expensive building in history after the Global Financial Crisis could be seen as poor timing and more grandiose than the project deserved. It is a wonderful ambition to have new buildings, but it is a question of the right balance and the right time," she argued.

The gallery's plan will double its floor space, allowing it to compete with other galleries for large travelling international exhibitions. Yet it will still be significantly smaller than the National Gallery of Victoria and the Australian National Gallery in Canberra.

In 2015, international award winning architects Kazuyo Sejima + Ryue Nishizawa of SANAA - Pritzker prize winners - in Tokyo won a global design competition. It was judged by a panel of the world's greatest architects including Australian Pritzker prizewinner - equivalent of the Nobel Prize - Glenn Murcutt.

SANAA's original concept envisaged a series of glass and sandstone boxes that would cascade across the existing landbridge to the north of the gallery over the Cahill Expressway. They would continue down the hill across the road from the Botanic Gardens. This site is occupied by two large disused, underground oil tanks built during the World War 2.

Ms White's book is also a memoir of her time working at the gallery over many years, starting in 1998 when she started editing Look magazine, the society's journal.

When she started working at the gallery, it was a place of joy, she says.

"It was an expanding universe, a thriving cultural hub. The curators produced one intelligently received, well-received, original exhibition after another," she writes.

When she returned to the gallery to work in 2014, after many years absence, she was shocked by the changes.

"All the joy had evaporated," she writes, staff were gagged from speaking out, volunteers were treated with lack of respect and many removed.

Ms White said there has been too little public consultation about the project, and it was unwise to stake the future of the gallery on such an expensive project.

The director of the Art Gallery of NSW, Michael Brand, said the book was disappointing.

"While the book raises a couple of important issues about the role of art museums today - indeed questions that art museum professionals debate robustly during the course of their work – most of the tenor of the book is very unfortunate, as is the commentary about so many individual members of our staff," he said.

The Sydney Modern project has been estimated to cost from $380 million to $450 million. It is understood that the NSW government could make a commitment soon, and that many donors have been waiting on this commitment before following suit.