ANU art collection brought together in Drill Hall Gallery

The art collection of the Australian National University is scattered across the campus, works by leading national and international artists hanging in hallways, offices, lecture theatres and libraries.

Now, in the recently refurbished Drill Hall Gallery, 100 of the more than 2500 pieces in the whole collection, which is worth more than $34 million, have been brought together in a major exhibition, 10 Years Collecting at the ANU.

Drill Hall Gallery director Terence Maloon said the collection was a reflection of the ANU, and more specifically the School of Art, but also of the university's ties with the indigenous and international community.

"This is not a collection like any other in Australia's museums," Mr Maloon said.

"It is unique to the ANU and its community and this is an occasion where we can show what a fine brace of works we have and what a resource it is."

The exhibition features significant works by indigenous artists such as George Tjungurrayi and Jacky Green, as well as the Australian modernist Tony Tuckson and contemporary artist Greg Hodge.

Five works by Papua New Guinean artist Simon Gende, a single portrait of former AFL player and 2014 Australian of the Year Adam Goodes, and four works depicting the attack on the Twin Towers and the capture of Osama Bin Laden, welcome you at the door.

The striking Flying Machine by Zhang Peili, one of China's most significant contemporary artists, was gifted to the University by Lois Conner last year in honour of the departing head of the Australian Centre on China in the World, Geremie Barme.

Mr Maloon said the university had a very proud tradition of engagement with indigenous communities and he was pleased that this exhibition reflected that.

A highlight includes a large work by Timothy Cook, Kuluma, an expression of his ongoing anxiety about the prospect of death.

"This extraordinary piece represents the black hole in the Milky Way through which Aboriginal people believe they will pass after death to meet their ancestors," Mr Maloon said.

"It represents the coming of age of the artist and the ANU is privileged to have this as part of its collection."

The exhibition also contains ceramics, glass, etchings, photographs and sculptures, including many pieces by relatively unknown artists and graduates of the ANU School of Art.