State Library of Victoria revamp opens new chapter on modern design era

Australian library designers are among the best in the world.

When it comes to libraries, content is clearly more important than form. But libraries can also be read. Australian architects are exceptionally good at imbuing these vital civic buildings with powerful metaphors and themes.

Before looking up anything at the State Library of Victoria (SLV), look up at the skylight. The scale and volume of the interiors – particularly the 34-metre high octagonal Latrobe reading room with its domed skylight designed by Bates Peebles & Smart in 1911 – draw our attention upwards, as if in veneration. In this temple of books, light illuminates the manuscripts.

Similarly Geelong's new spherical-shaped Library and Heritage Centre by ARM boldly declares the town's aspirational status as a smart city by presenting a powerful metaphor for learning: the Earth cleaved apart, ready to explore the gems within.

In Craigieburn, FJMT Studio designed the public library as a natural part of the landscape, using local rammed earth and timbers. The "global learning centre", as Hume Council calls it, combines numerous public roles into one – tax office, a children's centre, a council office and magnificent library.

"It glues together the community," says Sue McKerracher, chief executive of the Australian Library and Information Association (ALIA), which is establishing a new award scheme to acknowledge the country's exceptional new libraries. "What we realised was over the last three years our libraries in Australia are world standard."

In 2014, Craigieburn Library won the international public library of the year award, established by the Danish Agency for Culture. Geelong's library and the Library at the Dock by Clare Architects and Hayball have also been shortlisted. The ALIA decided to borrow the Danish idea of an award to provide a future resource for Australian designers and libraries. The 33 entries can be seen online and winners will be announced in June.

While the ALIA awards celebrate new buildings, one of the biggest library developments is occurring at Australia's first purpose-built free public library, the SLV. Under the $88 million Vision 2020 redevelopment, the library's public spaces will increase by 40 per cent and better link the 23 buildings on the block between Swanston and Russell Streets. Among the new spaces designed by Schmidt Hammer Lassen in a joint venture with local firms Architectus and Andronas Conservation Architecture are rooms dedicated to children's interactive learning and even business entrepreneurship.

Like its local library counterparts, the SLV combines functions beyond just a temple of books; in this case retail, cafe and art gallery. But a major focus for public libraries is digital literacy, says Justine Hyde, director of library services and experience at the SLV.

"As citizens are forced online and don't have other options for interacting with government or other bureaucracies, they tend to come to the library to ask for help."

Public library membership numbers 8.6 million in Australia. The SLV alone receives two million visitors each year – more than either the United States' Library of Congress or the British Library, according to Hyde.

"If you look at the range of needs across the community you have basic, which is 'how do I access a computer?' all the way to people who are already savvy in digital but want to use digital to enable their business idea or creative idea," she says.

In the 19th century SLV founder Sir Redmond Barry perceived the library as a "people's university" where anyone could access knowledge. In the 21st century's knowledge society and creative economy, Hyde believes libraries should support that shift in the economy and how people now work in a digital era.

"The principle for us is that a library is democratic and egalitarian and anyone with a good idea should be able to come to a library whether state or local public library and make that idea happen. Whether it's starting up a business, or publishing a book, or cutting an album or starting a social entrepreneurship venture, libraries are the logical place for people to start."

Within the SLV's century-old walls, a future is being mapped out. Clarity and openness are the principles behind the design, which employs a neutral palette of pale timbers and white columns. Any colour comes from the books and library users, says architect John Sprunt from Architectus. "Learning is the colour," he says.

While one of the features of the refurbishment is reopening the majestic skylight to the spectacular 1859 Queen's Hall Reading Room, it's just one part of the 21st century library.

"Libraries around the world are shifting from being temples of books to being spaces where people can make and play and collaborate," says Hyde. "We're shifting more to a space where you can create, not just consume."