Can 'starchitects' such as Zaha Hadid and Jean Nouvel save Melbourne's skyline?

Not everyone shares the excitement over two looming additions to the local architectural scene.

In the space of a few months last year, stars fell on Melbourne. Buildings by two Pritzker prize-winning international "starchitects", Zaha Hadid and Jean Nouvel, it was announced, would rise above the city. 

In the case of Hadid, the fist-pumping had the added air of poignancy. The Iraqi-born British architect's sudden death from a heart attack at just 65 had shocked the international architecture community. Her studio assured the world that it would continue. But would they be "originals", touched by her hand? Developers around the world were proudly announcing plans like they were dusting off old masterpieces. Now Melbourne too would have its own, a tiered filigree "vase" at 600 Collins Street. 

The Hadid design is one of a number of striking developments potentially reshaping Melbourne's skyline. Another landmark will appear further east on Collins, SHoP Architects and Woods Bagot's arched tower dubbed the "Pantscraper".

Yet not everyone is so ecstatic.

"An utterly boring development and a sign of the cultural cringe yet again," harrumphs Leon van Schaik, professor of architecture at RMIT.

Rob Adams is slightly more sanguine. While "all for good architects" the City of Melbourne's director of city design says, "I'd rather they would spend their time thinking about their impact down at the street level, than worrying what it looks like 190 metres above the ground." 

To some this might come across as parochial, jingoistic and curmudgeonly. Isn't it a sign of maturity to embrace globalisation? 

Adams and van Schaik aren't cranks. Between them they have helped reshape Melbourne's streets and the skyline that we celebrate and promote. They appreciate that culture and heritage are hard won, and it doesn't always pay to be in awe of the reputation of superstars.

Indeed they remember too well the work of another Pritzker starchitect, New York-based I.M. Pei, who designed Collins Place twin towers. 

"It was a game-changer," says Adams. Heritage buildings had been sacrificed and the lanes and arcades were removed or shut off. "It was an internalised shopping centre that really paid no respect to the surrounding streets, completely turning its back on Flinders Lane and Exhibition Street."

Since Adams arrived in 1983, the city has sought to incrementally advance the features already embedded in its streets. "People come to Melbourne and wonder how they can get a laneway culture? You don't just get a laneway culture. You have to have the lanes in the first place – they came out of something we inherited and we valued and we made better."

Over the past 30 years van Schaik has been instrumental in commissioning at RMIT the avant-garde buildings we now think of as synonymous with Melbourne's vibrant design culture: Edmond and Corrigan's castle-like Building 8, Sean Godsell's Design Hub, ARM's Storey Hall and oozing green brain, Lyons' spiky Swanston Academic Building. These university buildings that line the Swanston Street spine have enlivened the northern end of the CBD.

"The model is very simple," says van Schaik. "You support the local culture and you try and get exemplary buildings from every ambitious architect in the city."

For them it's vital to question what we want. To blindly collect "baubles of international architecture", as Adams calls it, risks looking like everywhere else. "The city becomes a zoo, where you have one of everything," says van Schaik. "It does nothing to differentiate the city from another one."

Furthermore, superstars aren't always as invested in producing work specifically for the local culture. "The Zaha Hadid brand has become totally diluted by the excessive production of work," says van Schaik. Variations on Hadid's twisting vases are proposed – or have been built – for the Gold Coast, Brisbane, Romania and China. As for the Pantscraper, van Schaik asks: "What does anyone gain from these histrionics? A poor version of a bad building [the CCTV tower] by Rem Koolhaas in Beijing. Nothing at all."

"We should build on our own strengths," says Adams. "We should be looking at what's distinctive about Melbourne – our laneways. If we try to be like everybody else we lose our uniqueness."

Not that everything designed by local architects succeeds. There are great failures down Elizabeth Street and Southbank where they are hard on the street, with small entrances that offer nothing to the public, according to John Denton, former government architect and co-director of global firm DCM. "They're the product of the current process of [developers offering] low fees going to cheap architects. So you get not-so-good architects doing not-so-good buildings. You don't get good architecture without good architects.

"The essence of making the city better is to get as many of those that are in the good to very good to excellent to fantastic range, rather than the beige mediocrity, which is the bulk of what we get. While not a great building by Zaha, [600 Collins Street] is another good example of a piece of architecture by a good architect."

Perhaps the bigger question is what is Melbourne shaping up to be? Where do we fail and what do we do well? What are the lost opportunities and where could we do better? And most importantly, how do we achieve it?

There is evidence of great local architecture all around us. In the triangle north of the giant flag roundabout down to Royal Park is arguably our proudest achievement. We've cultivated a world-class bio-medical precinct with The Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre (McBride Charles Ryan, Silver Thomas Hanley and DesignInc), the Royal Children's Hospital (Bates Smart, Billard Leece Partnership and HKS) and properties within the university of Melbourne such as Bio21 (Design Inc) and the Melbourne Brain Centre by Lyons.

"The VCCC completely changes a very institutional environment into something that's about hope and is uplifting," says Vanessa Bird, president of the Victorian chapter of the Australian Institute of Architects. "It combines cutting-edge research that isn't separated from patients, it has roof-top cafes and gardens and a void in the centre more reminiscent of a great public gallery than hospital architecture."

In 2012 the Royal Children's Hospital won the World Architecture Festival's award for the "World's Best Health Building". "More importantly it attracts international staff and retains them," says Bird. "It has a whole lot of different flow-on effects that have made a huge contribution to Melbourne."

These hospitals don't just treat patients and do research, they also let in the world. They welcome the public and look out to nature. "They could be impermeable island precincts, but they provide generous public amenity," says architect Kerstin Thompson.

Indeed it's the precincts that help define the city almost as much as our laneways: the arts precinct below the river, including ARM's acoustically accomplished interior of the Melbourne Recital Centre; the legal precinct around Queen Street with Peter Elliott's restrained VU Law School; the sports precinct along the Yarra marked by both the 1956 Olympic Swimming Pool and Cox Architecture's AAMI Park stadium.

So why don't we have more of these outstanding buildings? 

"Where we are failing is we don't have planning policy that champions design excellence," says Bird. "It's not written into policy in any way. The planning scheme has references to good urban design – height, setbacks, densities, general contexts – but it needs to stipulate that the individual buildings have design excellence." 

Encouraging consultation with the Victorian Government Architect's review panel is another way of raising the bar. But aside from major government buildings, it's not compulsory to do so. Yet even good architects benefit from an informed critical process. Not only did French architect Jean Nouvel appreciate the importance of Melbourne's laneway culture through a collaboration with local firm Architectus, his team made several fact-finding trips. The proposed 70-storey hotel and apartment tower they designed features an arcade with an "MCG-sized" screen offering video artworks and further laneway connections to the back streets.

Sustainability should also be mandated, says Bird. "Sustainability has been built into hospitals, universities and commercial buildings where they are retained by the owner, because sustainability makes sense to their life-cycle costing. But if you're the developer of an apartment building, sustainability isn't part of your costing because you on-sell them." She says incentives should be offered to developers to encourage sustainability.

"Inclusionary zoning – a percentage of a development that's available for low-income, key workers – is being discussed as part of the planning scheme and is completely necessary," says Bird. "We've been through 25 years of continuous economic development and we have more homeless people than we've ever had."

How will people who paid top dollar feel about having subsidised housing in their building?

"How do they feel about having homeless people living at the bottom of their building?" she counters. "It's part of being in a civil society that we make those things work.

"One of the real challenges for the next five to 10 years is balancing the number of commercial and residential buildings. At the moment residential towers are outstripping commercial towers. Liveability is about having that mix of uses so you can walk to work and recreate."

Last month Melbourne City Council announced the Munro project, a 196-metre high-rise tower designed by Bates Smart and Six Degrees architects that proposes many of the initiatives Bird outlines. Set back from the QV market site, the development offers 56 affordable housing units, a childcare facility, family health services, a community centre, artist spaces and gallery, market car parking, a hotel, residential apartments and retail spaces. In addition the building will pay for conversion of the existing QV market carpark, placing it below ground and turning the area into 1.5 hectares of public open space. However, the building is controversial because despite its smaller plot ratios, it's 96 metres taller than current height limits allow.

"Not every building can be an icon and not every building needs to be a tower," says Kerstin Thompson. "You need other buildings that are happy to be background, or happy to be the more low-key thing in between."

That's not to say they are inferior.  "I can't emphasise how important every single project is," Thompson says. "When too many things are seen as not that significant and are pretty average and you put them all together,  you've got a disaster on your hands."

Nor does it mean the buildings have to be new. Appreciating the small grain that's already thriving is part of what makes a great city too.

"There's a whole area behind the old Mint between Little Lonsdale and Latrobe which is packed with grungy little cafes and restaurants and it's just extraordinary," says van Schaik. "But if every one of these low-rent buildings gets knocked down, then everything will homogenise. There should be whole corridors where there are extreme height limits to stop the complete homogenisation of the inner city."

If this seems overly regulatory, think of the consequences. At Docklands and Fisherman's Bend, market forces ran rampant, resulting in egregious public outcomes that will take years to fix. ("Docklands will be OK in 10 years," Denton reassures. "But we've got to suffer for another 10 years to get there.") 

We are at a transition point, suggests Adams. We have to stop building on agricultural land and start doubling back on ourselves. This doesn't necessarily mean increasing the number of residential towers in the city. However, the city does have medium-level models (such as MCR's QV2 building by the State Library forecourt and JCB's Upper House in Swanston Street) that could suggest options around train stations and arterial routes. 

Van Schaik agrees. "We could maximise this thing that in the past people have despised us for, these long suburban strips. If we really get to work on all the positives around them, then the city becomes all the way alive in an architectural sense."

For these champions of local design, investing in local knowledge will be key to designing a greater Melbourne.
