Portraits of the 'Godmother of punk' to go on show

It was only shortly after photographer Norman Seeff moved to New York in 1968 that he captured what would become an iconic image of then unknown musician Patti Smith with photographer Robert Mapplethorpe.

"It was the middle of a cold, snowy winter when I met Robert and Patti at a downtown Manhattan bar," says Seeff. "I thought they looked cool and asked them to do a session with me.  It was a chance meeting and I didn't know anything about either of them. But we hit it off instantaneously. The authenticity and emotional depth of their love was exactly what I was looking for in my images." 

Seeff photographed the then couple at a friend's apartment in the city's Upper West Side in 1969. It was early days for Seeff who would go on to photograph many of the greatest musicians and bands of the 1970s and '80s – including the Rolling Stones, the Band and Joni Mitchell.

" I found Patti absolutely fascinating, both of them really. I was thrilled with almost every shot from that session. They were both extraordinary," Seeff says, "But I think the most extraordinary aspect was the way related to each other."

Seeff's images sit alongside the work of four other photographers – Lynn Goldsmith, Bob Gruen, Frank Stefanko and Allan Tannenbaum – focusing on Smith's career as a trailblazing musician and punk culture icon in a show at Paddington's Blender Gallery in April. 

"Its not often I get to dedicate an exhibition purely to an incredible female icon," Tali Udovich, director of Blender Gallery, said. "We are very excited to announce this is the first time that these photographs of the 'Godmother of punk' have been on display in Australia".

Some of the most memorable images come from the collection of Smith's friend Frank Stefanko, who photographed her from the early 1960s onwards.

Stefanko recalls taking Smith to her first Rolling Stones gig when they were both students in Philadelphia in 1966. "Patti was always a feisty one," he says. "During the concert, she walked up to the edge of the stage, folded her arms and stared down stone face Bill Wyman until he cracked a smile.

"To me, Patti was stunning, with raven black hair like black rain, pale blue eyes, and a beautiful complexion," says Stefanko. "Patti still calls me on my birthday every year, no matter where in the world she is, to sing happy birthday to me."