As Margiela Mania Returns, So Do His Classics

PARIS — Somewhere, far from a runway, Martin Margiela, is walking the streets of Paris, having long since abdicated the fashion industry and the label that bears his name.

But on the runways of Paris Fashion Week, his spirit still looms large — as large as ever. Margiela-ism is once again the religion in Paris fashion, kicked into gear by Demna Gvasalia, who began his career in the design studio of the Margiela maison and has imported the designer’s sensibility to Vetements and Balenciaga. From there, and not for the first time, the influence spread widely. So, what better time to go back to the wellspring?

For two days during fashion week, in a dusty rented shopfront on a side street in the Second Arrondissement, racks of vintage Margiela were wheeled out for sale. Gill Linton, the founder and chief executive of the contemporary-vintage site Byronesque, found a trove of Margiela from a handful of collectors and realized the time was right.

Persuading them to sell proved no great challenge.

“For Margiela, it’s a seller’s market right now,” she said. “There is so much demand.”

The original plan had been to hold the sale in one of Paris’s last remaining adult theaters, on the punny logic that Margiela, for those who love it, is fashion porn. Ms. Linton and her staff created porn-theater style posters to promote the sale, so popular among the customers that they are producing a small run of them for sale.

But the Margiela company, now owned by the OTB Group, felt otherwise, and requested a change. A last-minute switch was arranged to a space around the corner, still very much in the seamy, unseemly vein. (A scout was dispatched to the theater to hand out fliers with the new address, illicit piled on illicit.)

Despite the move, and despite the rain, on Sunday afternoon the shop was full, with groups of curious shoppers pawing racks of classic pieces tagged with their collection and year: a vest made of an old garment bag and tape (9,465 euros, or $10,030, 1992), in the classic Margiela use-everything style; a halter top made of leather gloves (€6,630, 2001), and bags of his famous cloven-hoof Tabi shoes. (How to wear the pair that was merely heels, no straps, top or fastenings at all? The Margiela way: B.Y.O. tape.)

“Yes, we do have those collectible pieces,” Ms. Linton said, “but at the same time, people who buy this stuff are also people who love great design, and who would spend a couple thousand dollars on a Vetements piece.”

Unsurprisingly, many of those people are fashion people, including the young Danish model Frederikke Sofie, fresh from a fitting for the Chanel show. Ms. Sofie, who wasn’t even born when Mr. Margiela made many of his iconic pieces, purchased several items, which Ms. Linton bagged in plain brown paper.