4 Stylish French Girls Reveal What They Wear Instead of Leggings

For whatever reason, the legging trend has continued to take off like wildfire among the fashion community, and there seems to be no end in sight. Even as the rise of athleisure moves forward, leggings are the one item it seems no one is willing to retire—except for the French. Curious about the above phenomenon, I wanted to see if this comfortable trouser style was as popular with the most stylish women I know—Parisians—as with Brits and Americans.
After asking four stylish French girls a few general questions about their personal preferences on leggings, one thing was clear: The French don't really wear leggings anywhere besides the gym. With so many alternative trouser options out there these days, the women ahead waste no time with a trend that they associate with bad taste and a lack of elegance—their words, not mine.
Go on to read more about French girls' opinions on leggings, as well as to shop the trousers they are wearing instead.

"Instead of leggings, if I want to feel comfortable, I wear sweatpants (they are more fashionable). Leggings aren't really elegant to me, but I do wear them every day at the gym."

"I can't speak for all French women, but I guess in France, leggings are still synonymous with bad taste. The border between sportswear and casual clothing is really thick. If I want to wear something close-fitting, I usually wear leather pants or skinny jeans. And if I am looking for something comfortable, I go for knit pants or oversize pants. I choose not to wear leggings because I still see them as workout clothes. When it comes to fashion, I am a bit conservative; I don't really jump on new trends."

"French women still have this idea that leggings are for sport activities only. Instead, I wear jeans or carrot pants—anything else besides leggings. I choose not to wear them mostly because I feel like I'm wearing only tights. I do have one or two pairs, but I only wear them to hang out at home."

"I choose not to wear leggings because I think I wore them too much years ago (with dresses!), and now I just can't stand wearing them except for to the gym. I prefer culottes or boyfriend jeans if I want something comfy."