Britney Spears to Receive First-Ever Icon Award at 2017 Radio Disney Music Awards

Britney Spears arrives at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards at Madison Square Garden on Aug. 28, 2016 in New York City. 
Oops, she did it again: Britney Spears is coming home to Disney.

At this year’s Radio Disney Music Awards, the pop superstar will be presented with the first-ever Icon Award. The award recognizes an artist whose music is loved by Radio Disney fans of multiple generations and whose career goes beyond the limits of popular culture.

Spears has sold nearly 150 million records worldwide since her first single, “…Baby One More Time,” was released in 1998. Six of her albums debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 and she has more than 30 Billboard Hot 100 hits, including four No. 1s. With more than 15 singles played on Radio Disney, the station considers the pop princess one of the most successful entertainers and a true icon.

The 2017 RDMAs will take place Saturday, April 29, at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles. The two-hour telecast of the event will air Sunday, April 30, at 7 p.m. ET across multiple Disney-branded platforms.

MTV Announces Revamped MTV Movie & TV Awards

MTV is spicing up its long-standing MTV Movie Awards to include TV for the first time in 25 years.

The newly minted MTV Movie & TV Awards is hoping to celebrate young Hollywood’s best performances across an expanded selection of favorites from both the big and small screens.

“We’re living in a golden age of content, and great storytelling and characters resonate regardless of whether you’re watching it in a theater or on TV,” Chris McCarthy, president of MTV, said in a press release.

MTV will also host a Movie & Television Festival during the day leading up to the main event. Live performances, special guests and food will have fans participating in a day-long party outside the venue.

The 2017 MTV Movie & TV Awards will take place at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles. The show will air live at 8 p.m. ET/PT on MTV. 

Here Are All the 2017 iHeartRadio Music Awards Performances Ranked From Worst to Best

Though only eight performers rocked the stage at Sunday's (Mar. 5) iHeartRadio Music Awards, it was still more than enough to fill out two hours' worth of primetime entertainment -- starting with Katy Perry treadmilling on a giant hamster wheel, and ending with Bruno Mars digging into his back catalog (in track pants!). Here are the night's eight performances, ranked from worst to best.

8. Katy Perry, "Chained to the Rhythm"

Maybe it was exhaustion from the two awards shows (on two continents) at which she's already performed her new single in the past month, but for her third go with "Chained to the Rhythm," Katy Perry didn't quite seem to have it, bringing a slightly lower intensity and sounding pitchy in spots. Still, the set design had its moments -- the giant hamster and accompanying wheel being an obvious highlight -- and the high-five with Halsey in the crowd was nice.

7. Ed Sheeran, "Shape of You" / "Castle on the Hill"

Old hat for Ed at this point -- he's spent most of 2017 performing one or both of these songs at award shows, and though both the loop-built rendition of "Shape" and the full-band run through "Castle" were enjoyable, there wasn't a ton new to recommend either. Gotta love that peerless Khaled intro, though -- next time, let's have that duo's Miami adventures played in photo montage behind Sheeran's performance.

6. The Chainsmokers feat. Chris Martin, "Paris" / "Something Just Like This"

Of all the multi-song performances of the night, this one made the most sense -- neither "Paris" or "Something" feels like quite enough on its own, but as two halves of a whole, it made for one of the night's more satisfying (if not particularly challenging) performances. Nice of Chris Martin to keep showing up for these things, too, though he always was rock's quintessential good sport.

5. Thomas Rhett, "Star of the Show"

More of an elaborate pop production than country performances usually get at award shows, with Rhett sauntering his way through choreography (not his) and meta-set design on his way from his couch to the stage. Still, the performance mostly worked because of Rhett's easy affability, making him seem like a star worthy of essentially being country's sole musical representative at the night's awards.

4. Shawn Mendes, "Mercy"

Not quite worthy of the near-superhero billing given to him by Daya and Bebe Rexha's intro, but Mendes does seem to get more self-assured at every awards show, and his performance of "Mercy" was certainly among the night's strongest. Not sure what was going on with that psychedelic set, though.

3. Big Sean, "Voices in My Head" / "Bounce Back" / "Moves"

Not the most show-stopping of performances, and the backup dancers that showed up late in the performance actually proved mostly unnecessary, but Sean himself was undeniably winning, keeping his three-song performance moving (semi-pun semi-intended) with impressive energy. Dude just seemed pumped to be there, and there's certainly something to be said for that.

2. Noah Cyrus feat. Labrinth, "Make Me (Cry)"

A little unpolished in delivery -- this was Noah Cyrus' first awards show performance, and the anxiousness definitely showed a little -- but still charming in both its instrumental unpredictability and in Cyrus' impressive pipes, big-upped with no small amount of gushing by big sis Miley before performance's start. Don't be surprised if the minor hit becomes a major hit not long after this.

1. Bruno Mars, "Treasure" / "That's What I Like"

Innovator may be something of a stretch for 2010s pop's finest retro-fitter, but no doubt that whatever the ensemble, Bruno wears it well -- including at these awards, where he made his medley of "Treasure" (a throwback at four years old) and new smash "That's What I Like" work as seamlessly as his jacket-and-track-pants combo. Even if he's not exactly radio's first name in pushing things forward, he always makes the present a pretty OK place to be.

