Brad’s Life Makeover! Inside Pitt’s Top-To-Bottom Plan To Quit Booze & Drugs
Will it be enough to win back Angelina Jolie?

Brad Pitt’s nasty divorce from Angelina Jolie may have been a blessing in disguise, as RadarOnline.com has exclusively learned that the breakup has pushed the actor in a 360-degree total life overhaul, complete with AA meetings, art therapy, a recovery chef and more!

After confessing his struggles with alcoholism on the cover of GQ magazine this week, a source close to Pitt’s camp told Radar, “Brad has been attending regular AA meetings in Malibu and he really enjoys going. The meetings he attends are super low-key and they’ve helped him stay sober!”

SAD PHOTOS: The Shocking Divorce: Inside Angelina Jolie & Brad Pitt’s Miserable Last Days

In addition to attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, “Brad has also hired a chef who is well known in the recovery community for creating meals that help to heal people,” said the insider.

“Brad’s sober chef has worked out a meal plan with him that is specifically designed for people who have quit boozing and drugs and have a hard time eating full meals because of withdrawal and stress,” the source told Radar.

“The chef is literally famous for his body-transforming meals,” the insider added. As Radar has reported, this is EXACTLY what Pitt needs, having dropped a huge chunk of weight over the last several months.

SHOCKING PHOTOS: Wearing Thin! Brad Pitt UNRECOGNIZABLE At First Public Appearance Since Angie Split

As Radar reported in February, prior to attending AA meetings in Malibu, Pitt checked himself into treatment for addiction at a $15,000 per week retreat inside a private suite at Casa Del Mar in Santa Monica.

There, he reportedly attended a Narcotics Anonymous group party on January 22. NA is a mutual aid fellowship similar to AA, but focused on drug use more than alcohol.

Do you think that Angelina Jolie should give Brad Pitt another chance? Tell us your thoughts below.