Grace Gummer and Joe Sikora Talk Sexual Harassment on Set and How to Fight Back

"I was working on this TV show and there was an older man who was way up ... he was basically sexually harassing this younger woman."

Imagine starting a new job. Your new coworker gives you the lay of the land; he warns you that you might have to deal with some handsy guys on the job, gives you some tips on how to avoid them. Now imagine that coworker showing you exactly how handsy those guys can be — by demonstrating on you. The scene turns from friendly, to weird, to wrong in just moments.

That's what plays out in "The Coworker," a short film starring Grace Gummer and Joe Sikora that is part of the six-part series #ThatsHarassment. “The Coworker” and the rest of the shorts, which were directed by Sigal Avin and executive produced by David Schwimmer and Mazdack Rassi, co-founder of Milk Studios, are filmed in such a manner that you are decisively placed on the outside. You’re forced into the role of voyeur, glimpsing an intimate and terrible moment. Confronted by what you see, you have to wonder: What would I do if I saw that situation? And then: What would I do if I were in that situation?

Last week, I met with the stars of “The Coworker” in downtown New York to ponder these questions. We talked about the ubiquity of harassment and the importance of speaking out, even when it isn’t the easy thing to do (because let’s be real, it’ll never be the easy thing to do).

Why did you guys decide to join the project?
Grace Gummer: Emmy [Rossum, who also stars in the series] asked me if I would join and right away, I was interested because I feel like there is not enough out there on sexual harassment. Also, the day Emmy asked me if I wanted to participate, I went to the doctor’s office — it was a plastic surgeon in Beverly Hills, for a mole removal on my face — and halfway through the consultation, he told me I was cute and gave me a hug. And as it was happening, I was like, Ugh, I don’t want to touch this person’s arm, like, on my face, because he was sitting and I was standing. [Editor's note: Another video in the series shows a doctor sexually harassing a patient.]

Did he try to pass it off as anything not … creepy?
Gummer: No, it wasn’t even that creepy, weirdly. It was just not appropriate. It wasn’t like, “Oh, you’re so cute, I want to hug you.” It was patronizing and it just crossed a border. I didn’t think twice about it, and then I went home, and Emmy sent me the links to the short, and I watched them, and after watching the doctor one, I was like, “Oh, that was weird.” I asked my boyfriend and my brother, because I saw them that night. I was like, “Would it be weird if you went to the doctor, and they told you you were cute and gave you a hug?” And they were like, “What are you talking about, that never happens. That’s really fucked up, did that happen to you?”

Joe, how did you feel playing a creep?

Joe Sikora: When we first started doing it, I was kind of talking like myself and then I affected this Cali-type accent. I felt like I didn’t want [the character] to be so close to home. [The experience] affected me so much that, afterward, I was saying to Grace, sometimes with PAs [on set], I will familiarize myself with the girls more, like, at the end of the day, give them a hug or something like that. I don’t know them that well. And I’m in a position of power. What are they gonna say? “Listen, please don’t touch me.” It’s up to the men to educate men to be like, "Be more conscious of your body with another woman." Because 99 out of 100 girls are gonna be like, “OK, well, whatever. That’s the actor and I’m a PA. I’ve gotta accept this.”

Gummer: I was working on this TV show, and there was an older man who was way up, he had a lot of power in making the thing, and there was some weird stuff where he was basically sexually harassing this younger woman who was in a very low position. And everyone saw it happening. She wanted to keep her job, and she was at the lowest of the low, and she didn’t have a voice. And so I saw it happening, and finally I went to somebody and spoke on her behalf, and she thanked me because otherwise she felt like she wouldn’t have been able to do anything about it.

That makes me think of something my friend told me about his job — there’s a guy who’s known to be a creep, who only hires young women. I was like, "You should report him." I got kind of mad he stayed silent. It’s a sad and terrible situation.

Gummer: Yeah, and then also you’re probably in fear of being in the position of, like, the tattletale. Like, when I was reporting this person, the head of HR had to call me and do a whole recorded 20-minute interview asking what I had seen and the details of it, so they could sit down with him and do counseling and therapy and stuff, and I was like, “Listen, I don’t know how much I should get involved, but this is what I saw and this is what I know.” I think that a lot of people would feel like, “I don’t want to get involved in this,” but we have to rely on each other.

How did you feel about the way your character responded to the harassment? Do you wish she'd responded differently?
Gummer: I think a lot of women find themselves in that situation where they’re excited about a new job, and they want to keep their new job, and they want to seem like they’re cool and not overly sensitive, and they don’t want to make a big deal out of it. If it was me, I personally would have been like, “Don’t fucking touch me,” you know what I mean? But you never know how you’re going to feel in that moment. I think that what’s so smart about these shorts is that [they show] sexual harassment happening in these little, intimate spaces where you feel comfortable with the person. That eats away at your self-confidence. You feel like someone trusts you and you trust them, and they’re abusing that trust. Then it starts to eat away at your soul. It’s really fucked up.

Joe, I don’t know if you’ve been in a situation like this, but Grace, you definitely have, and when you’re in it, it’s like, How do I react? What do I do?
Sikora: Bizarrely, I have been in that situation. And you know what? The very few times I have, it freaked the hell out of me. Because I’m just like, What the fuck is going on here? Oh my god, I have to act this way? Now granted, these things may have happened a long time ago, but it’s very awkward and you do that exact thing, which I’m sure women have to do times a thousand, to my experience. It’s a million things going through your mind: Where do I put all these things in these little boxes, so everything can be cool, and I can keep my job, and I don’t have to deal with this person? Or, How do I placate this?

Gummer: Then when other people are around, which is implied in these shorts, there’s that feeling of, “Oh, other people are watching, I gotta keep my cool.” Like, “Don’t freak out, don’t say something.”

Sikora: Otherwise you’re gonna be a bitch. "Oh god, she’s so crazy."

Gummer: Right. Because the person in control is setting the tone. If my character was like, “Please don’t do that,” after the ass-grabbing thing, he’d be like, “Woah, woah, woah, woah, woah.” Either she would have lost her job, or—

Sikora: The police would have to get involved. Then you’re on record with the municipality, like, you registered a complaint. It’s a whole thing.

Gummer: Yeah, a whole floodgate, and sometimes it’s just easier to be like, “It didn’t happen.”

Sikora: “I’m tired today. I’m fucking tired. You know what? I wanna go home, watch Game of Thrones.”

Gummer: Fuckin’ chill.

It’s hard to fight and have to deal with it.
Gummer: It gets so ingrained, it’s so there. I don’t really know what to do about it. But I think we’re doing the right thing.

Sikora: I think one of the great things about these shorts is they will plant seeds. [Now] for a woman to rectify that situation — inappropriate touching, any of that stuff — she has to file complaints, take time to go to authorities. All these things can be simplified with awareness and respect. And I think that's what these films are very consciously doing. More things like this can raise our consciousness of stuff so men realize, “The responsibility is on me,” so they don’t put it on somebody else, on the victim.

Gummer: And also so women are able to have the confidence to know what’s going on. To see it and respond and fight back.