Lady in red: Nicki Minaj posts cheeky Instagram photos in plush wrap ahead of Billboard Music Awards

Nicki Minaj tweeted a pair of images Saturday night of herself in a steamy red ensemble that included a scarlet coat of what looked like faux fur.
Pink and blonde mingled in her knee-length hairdo, and she showcased a good deal of her zaftig thighs, as well as a bit of her curvy derriere, in her ensemble.
The Port Of Spain-born 34-year-old rapper had posted a trio of images of herself in the selfsame ensemble - in the same setting - to Instagram four days before.
That setting was a narrow room with walls of plush charcoal, and in the two images Nicki tweeted on Saturday, the Anaconda raper leaned against those walls.
A profusion of bracelets about her left wrist, she'd slid into a pair of bright red boots that stretched past her knees and clasped on a tangle of glistening necklaces.
Her gleaming bright red bralett ematched a set of underwear that'd been accompanied by scarlet strings of beads sloping about the musicians' thighs.
The two images posted Saturday featured the hashtag: '#NickiBBMAs,' likely a reference to the fact the Billboard Music Awards will to occur Sunday in Las Vegas.
Held at the T-Mobile Arena on the Strip, the Billboard Music Awards will open with a performance from Nicki, as the award show's own website reported on Thursday.
She's also nominated for the fan-voted Billboard Chart Achievement award alongside Luke Bryan, The Chainsmokers, Twenty One Pilots and The Weeknd, per that site.
One of Nicki's Instagram photos from four days past was of her leaning against a wall and arcing her back as she stuck out her tongue and closed her eyes.
In another of those photos, she was still pressing her hands to the wall and still arcing her back, but was offering her best smoldering stare straight at the camera.
Yet another Instagram photo posted that day saw her standing mostly upright, her entire body faced toward the camera, though she leaned slightly to one side.