Future of journalism to be examined

An assortment of senators have launched a public inquiry into the future of journalism in the age of shrinking newsrooms, social media behemoths and so- called fake news.

The loose alliance, including senators Sam Dastyari, Scott Ludlam, Nick Xenophon and Jacqui Lambie, pushed to investigate the structures of media organisations, tax arrangements and the adequacy of consumer laws.

'If we don't grapple (with) these issues as a matter of urgency you'll see more journalists and camera operators and others that make the news happen losing their jobs,' Senator Xenophon said in Canberra on Wednesday.

'You simply cannot have a situation where you have Facebook and Google, between them raking $3.2 billion in ad revenue, piggy-backing and cannibalising the content of Australian journalists and Australian newsrooms.'

He wants media organisations to be able to take on content aggregators, search engines and social media sites who cannibalise content.

'If a media organisation has their views misrepresented or distorted by the fake news process, I think there ought to be a redress,' Senator Xenophon said.

'That's not government interference, it's quite different. It's about competition policy and abuses of market power that seem to allow these things to happen.'

Senator Dastyari said recent events, including the latest round of job cuts at Fairfax Media, highlighted immense challenges facing Australian journalism.

The Labor senator pre-emptively rebutted those who may argue it is not the role of government or public policy to interfere.

'There is a role for government and policy-makers to create a vibrant, free, independent press that allows Australian consumers to get the information they need,' he said.

Senator Ludlum said the end game was not necessarily regulators playing a greater role, but he said shining a light on targeted, co-ordinated and well- resourced efforts to undermine democracy was in the public interest.

The inquiry will examine fake news, propaganda and public disinformation in Australia and overseas, looking at international responses.

Senators are also expected to investigate the future of public and community broadcasters, especially in regional Australia, as well as culturally and linguistically diverse communities.

Liberal backbencher Eric Abetz said the inquiry was 'troubling'.

'Giving senators the totalitarian power to haul before a special select committee any journalist who they believe is publishing fake news, propaganda, disinformation or clickbait is a retrograde step for our democracy,' Senator Abetz said.

'Individual journalists have never been dragged before Senate Estimates and the Senate shouldn't be in the business of doing so.'

- See more at: http://www.skynews.com.au/news/politics/federal/2017/05/10/future-of-journalism-to-be-examined.html#sthash.NQzKpIiG.dpuf