New Transformers 5 Poster Goes Fully Medieval

Transformers: The Last Knight promises to be another mad-cap science-fiction adventure based on the popular line of Hasbro toys, and the latest theatrical poster goes fully medieval. Directed by returning franchise lead helmer Michael Bay, the fifth installment in the Transformers feature franchise already looks like a thrilling new chapter in the blockbuster motion picture property, with the legs to take the series to places it hasn’t been before – including several historically based locales from the past.

Featuring a stirring supporting turn from Hollywood royalty Anthony Hopkins – in addition to Mark Whalberg who will be returning as lead protagonist Cade Yeager – Bay’s box office contender is sure to draw a crowd when Transformers: The Last Knight finally sees theatrical release later next month. Well known by now for its outsized ambition and over-the-top theatricality, the Transformers franchise has proven itself to be a wildly popular blockbuster property multiple times over – and the latest theatrical poster for the fifth movie plays up to said popularity in spades.

Featuring an especially medieval-looking incarnation of the film’s titular robots, the latest theatrical poster for Transformers: The Last Knight is a true marvel to behold that hints at the extents to which the new movie will be an even bigger and bolder entry into the larger canon of Transformers films. The film’s script is purported to uncover the hidden history of the Transformers on Earth over the past hundreds of years, and the latest poster gives a hint towards what the Transformers might have been up to in the Middle Ages. Check out the poster in question below:

Supported by the intriguing tagline, “They’ve been here forever,” the latest poster for Transformers: The Last Knight makes for quite the impressive spectacle in and of itself. Depicting several warring men in suits of armor and equipped with various pieces of medieval weaponry, everything is looking up for the latest Bay-directed blockbuster event.

As the franchise continues with Transformers: The Last Knight, many fans are no doubt hoping for an even bigger bang with the latest feature franchise installment, and with any luck the film’s several historical interludes will prove to be as thrilling as the latest poster makes them out to be. On that note, here’s to hoping for the very best from Bay and company when the new movie finally makes its way to multiplexes across the country within one month’s time.