Fantastic Beasts 2: What We Know So Far
BY MIKE REYES
3 COMMENTS
WARNING: Some Spoilers for Fantastic Beasts and Where To Find Them are in play. Please bookmark this story until you've watched the film, unless you're ready for spoilers.

Fantastic Beasts and Where To Find Them was always going to be the doorway to more adventures in the wizarding world of J.K. Rowling. But instead of just three films, the Fantastic Beasts series is in the game for five installments of Newt Scamander and his friends fighting against the forces of darkness. So now's probably a fantastic time to compile what we know about the next installment of this new series, which we'll name Fantastic Beasts 2 for the time being, as per the naming convention decided upon by the guardians of the series. What do we know so far about Fantastic Beasts 2? Read on and find out.

When Will Fantastic Beasts 2 Be In Theaters?
With previous reports that films in the Fantastic Beasts world would be coming every two years, it has been presumed that Fantastic Beasts and Where To Find Them 2 is penciled in for a November 16, 2018 release date. Of course, unforeseen delays in production and casting may or may not make this date implausible as production comes into view. Knowing Warner Bros. and their vested interest in the franchise, though, we'd be surprised if something actually did happen to change this date.

What Will Fantastic Beasts 2 Be Rated?
Both the Harry Potter and Fantastic Beasts series seem to be in the PG / PG-13 wheelhouse. However, the PG-13 is likely to stick, as it doesn't seem that the darkness of the threats to the wizarding world will be lightening anytime soon. Not to mention, the series started out with a PG-13, and unless there's a lot less wizarding and a lot more magizoology in the next film, we don't see the films ever being downgraded back to PG.

Who Will Direct Fantastic Beasts 2?
After originally balking at returning to the world of Harry Potter, David Yates brought himself back into the fold with Fantastic Beasts and Where To Find Them. Judging by some remarks he's made as early as last month, this new chapter seems to have reinvigorated him, as he's now apparently ready to see the series through its five film plan. Though this isn't an official announcement, it'd be ridiculous for Warner Bros. not to get Yates under contract as soon as possible, if he isn't already.