Amber Heard Is Getting Seriously Ripped For Aquaman

One could argue that one of the hardest things about getting to be a superhero in a movie -- asides from maybe the scheduling commitments -- is that you have to go through insane workout routines to get in shape. Superheroes may get their abs from lightning or being billionaires, but we all have to get them the old fashioned way. Amber Heard is currently preparing for her role as Mera in Aquaman, and has posted some pictures of one the workout routines she performs to keep her superheroine physique. Check it out below.

quaman has officially begun filming, but that doesn't mean the working out can stop. Amber Heard posted a picture to Instagram of just one of the exercises she has to do to stay in shape for her role, and it is definitely not something I envy. The series of pictures show her pulling at a weighed cart with a rope. Riding along is her co-star Yahya Abdul-Mateen II, who plays villain Black Manta in the movie. Heard describes Abdul-Mateen as "the best/worst workout wingman," and it's easy to see why. Heard has to pull his entire body weight, all while he delightfully sticks his tongue out, challenging her.

Hey, it could be worse; she could have to be on a horrible diet of agonizingly bland foods like some other celebrities, though she probably does have to do that too.

Amber Heard has had to do a lot more than just workout for Aquaman or her cameo in Justice League, but her role as warrior princess Mera seems to demand no less. The actress has also had to do a ton of training in other skills to be prepared to handle the onscreen action. Heard has previously posted pictures of herself working with 87Eleven, the production company responsible for the fight choreography in John Wick, John Wick: Chapter 2, and the upcoming Charlize Theron starring Atomic Blonde. Plus, Heard has had to train in martial arts with a sword. All of this is to say that Mera is going to be a serious badass in these movies.

Mera will first debut in Justice League alongside Jason Momoa's Aquaman, before moving over to a bigger part in the solo Aquaman film. Heard plays Mera, traditionally Aquaman's love interest and confidant in his adventures. Technically, she's from an underwater kingdom of sorts from another dimension called Xebel. She was originally sent to Atlantis to assassinate Aquaman but ended up falling in love with him instead (as these things tend to go). In addition to having most of Aquaman's powers, she can control water, using it to fashion weapons and such.

Aquaman is slated to release in theaters on December 21, 2018. For more about the film, here's everything we know.