First Look At Ghost Rider In The Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Finale
BY LAURA HURLEY
12 HOURS AGO1 COMMENT
Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. took a spooky turn in the beginning of Season 4 with the introduction of Robbie Reyes, a.k.a. Ghost Rider. The Spirit of Vengeance came on the scene to kick ass, take names, and look terrifyingly awesome while doing it. Robbie has been absent ever since he, his uncle, and the Spirit of Vengeance disappeared back in December, but he's due back in the Season 4 finale, and we now have our first looks at him. Check him out!

It's good to see Robbie back in the world of the living, but he's not exactly looking fresh as a daisy. Wherever he went at the end of the winter finale, I'm guessing it wasn't anywhere happy. Given that his traveling mates were his evil uncle and the Spirit to whom he sold his soul, we probably shouldn't be surprised if he's a little tense when he's back topside and chatting with our merry band of agents again.

If any thought that being swept away to another dimension meant that Robbie would be free of the Ghost Rider identity, the chains and car point toward Robbie and the Spirit still being connected. The hellfire chains certainly came in handy for the agents when Robbie was in action and in control, but they weren't exactly fun for Robbie to wield. Considering who he hooks up with in the finale, he'll probably be asked to use them once again. Take a look:

Robbie will be meeting up with at least Coulson and Daisy in the S.H.I.E.L.D. ship, complete with his car and his chains. We can't say at this point how he made it back to our dimension or what happened to reunite him with the agents, but Coulson and Daisy will probably want him and his unique abilities back in action to overcome all that A.I.D.A. did since they last teamed up. We do know that the reason Robbie was written out was that Ghost Rider was too pricy to be featured in every episode; hopefully he isn't being brought back just to be killed off. We'll have to wait and see.

The Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Season 4 finale airs on Tuesday, May 16 at 10 p.m. ET on ABC. Stay tuned to CinemaBlend for the latest in TV news, and don't forget to check out our summer TV premiere schedule to discover all your viewing options now and in the coming weeks. Be sure to drop by our rundowns for cable/streaming and broadcast TV renewals and cancellations as well. Our TV season finale schedule can give you all you need to know about your shows ending.