Edge Of Tomorrow 2 Has A Title And We Should Have Seen It Coming

A true sci-fi gem, Edge of Tomorrow is a beloved -- if underrated -- film that people have wanted a sequel from since it first arrived in 2014...well, the people who actually saw it, that is. Though Edge of Tomorrow (or Live. Die. Repeat. depending on your preference) received critical acclaim upon release, it took a while for the film to build an audience. Now, the makers and stars of that film are all down to appear in a sequel! Director Doug Liman revealed that not only do they have a story they love, but also a title.

We have an amazing story! It's incredible! Way better than the first film, and I obviously loved the first film. It will be called Live Die Repeat and Repeat. Tom [Cruise] is excited about it, and Emily Blunt is excited about it. The big question is just when we'll do it. But it's not an if, it's a when.

You really have to love that excitement! Doug Liman (who really loves talking this movie up) directed Edge of Tomorrow from a screenplay written by Christopher McQuarrie and starred Tom Cruise and Emily Blunt. While this is still in the very early stages of development, Liman has a story that he loves and everyone else involved is excited about it too. It's great news to hear that Liman is so confident that the sequel will happen and he even dropped the name of the film to Collider: Live Die Repeat and Repeat. Honestly, we really could have predicted that title, but it's better than On the Edge of the Edge of Tomorrow.

If you aren't familiar with the unique naming situation behind Edge of Tomorrow, this might be confusing to you, so I'll lay out some history briefly. The film was originally going to be called All You Need Is Kill, the same title as its source material. But the studio nixed it and it was changed to Edge of Tomorrow. However, when the film came out on Blu-ray and digital HD, Live. Die. Repeat. was all over the cover. So, everybody just tends to call the movie whatever they want. Naming the sequel after the home video title seems to hint at which title production prefers.

Edge of Tomorrow is a sci-fi action film that follows Tom Cruise, who eschews his normal roles by playing a cowardly public affairs officer forced to fight in humanities war against an alien invasion. Long story short, alien blood causes Tom Cruise to repeat the exact same day over and over again every time he dies (he dies A LOT). He teams up with super-soldier Emily Blunt to find a way out of the cycle and end the invasion for good. Doug Liman's comments are also the first confirmation we have that Emily Blunt's character will return for the sequel, which is great news.

Edge of Tomorrow is a really entertaining movie and here's hoping everyone's busy schedules line up soon, so they can get this sequel on the move!