Coffee order: would you like environmental sustainability with that?
Our daily brew is creating an environmental disaster, but social enterprises are coming up with new ideas for cups, pods and coffee grinds

It’s one of our favourite habits, but those who enjoy a daily cup of coffee may not be aware of its very significant downside. Each year billions of non-biodegradable coffee cups, lids and disposable pods pile up in landfill, creating a growing environmental issue.

Australians use an estimated one billion disposable coffee cups annually, but these cups are not recyclable in most states. The petroleum oil-based plastic lining that makes them waterproof cannot be recycled with paper and cardboard collections. In fact Planet Ark recommends putting them in the rubbish, rather than the recycle bin for fear of contaminating the whole load.

Similarly Australians spent more than $215m on coffee pods in 2015, but the convenient capsules are not biodegradable because of the combination of plastics and aluminium with organic matter inside.

And so a growing number of social entrepreneurs are getting creative to raise awareness and inspire coffee lovers to reduce the impact they have on our planet. Others are channelling the funds consumers pay for their daily roast towards a range of social projects.

Melbourne-based social entrepreneur Soula Thuring has taken the direct approach, selling biodegradable coffee cups with an additional Enviro Grow kit which turns the used cup into a plant.


'We are all entrepreneurs': Muhammad Yunus on changing the world, one microloan at a time
 Read more
The $2 Grow Cup of Life kit contains a soil pellet that expands with water, a seed mat and instructions for growing kale, beetroot, rocket and other healthy foods. It can be planted in the backyard or elsewhere and it breaks down in a few months.

Biodegradable coffee cups have been around for more than a decade but are still only a relatively small share of the market, largely because of their higher price. Thuring says she came up with the idea for her kits when she learned just how many takeaway cups in Australia are wasted every year.

“It’s about raising awareness ... about the impact of any waste going to our landfills,” Thuring says. “But more so about the coffee cup. One billion is a lot of people that aren’t aware.”

Yet even biodegradable cups aren’t recyclable in most places, so Thurling would like to see more long-term solutions such as the on-site automated composting technology developed by Queensland-based Paul Harrey and Penelope Mitchell. These aerobic composting machines recycle organic waste into compost and soil conditioners.

Social enterprise Streat, founded in Melbourne in 2009, has won over customers with its mix of delicious coffee and food, environmental responsibility and dedication to tackling social disadvantage.

Recently the enterprise teamed up with Melbourne-based coffee startup Pod & Parcel to put its coffee in biodegradable coffee pods to be used in Nespresso machines.

According to Pod & Parcel founders Ben Goodman, Elliott Haralambuos and entrepreneur Jai Felinski, an estimated 2 to 3 million coffee pods are consumed daily in Australia, contributing globally to more than 30 billion disposed coffee pods containing aluminium.

Goodman’s original intention was to get better coffee into coffee pods. Later the team made the decision to use biodegradable pods. They set up shop in the living room of Goodman’s Hawthorn apartment and advertised their new range. The consumer response was overwhelming.

“It was crazy,” Goodman says. “We sold out within a day. We had to call our friends over to help us pack these boxes to send out.”

They now sell between 10,000 and 15,000 pods a month. Goodman says he believes the quality of the product appeals to consumers more than its sustainability.

“I don’t think the consumer sees enough value in something being purely a sustainable product to make the switch, especially if the quality isn’t there,” he says.

Cups and pods aren’t the only problems associated with coffee consumption. The many tonnes of used coffee grounds also have an impact. When organic waste breaks down in an anaerobic environment such as a landfill site, it releases methane – a far more harmful greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.

In 2015, friends Ryan Creed and Julian Mitchell set out to solve this problem by founding Western Australia’s first urban mushroom farm in Fremantle, using waste coffee grounds to grow gourmet oyster mushrooms. Oyster mushrooms sell for upwards of $40 a kilo and are typically imported.

The pair crowdfunded $30,000 and cycled around Fremantle every day picking up the waste and mixing it with mushroom spores. Last year they moved into a shipping container dedicated to growing mushrooms and began supplying mushrooms back to the very restaurants that were giving them their waste.

“It’s a closed-loop food system where the waste comes from the same organisation that the food is consumed at,” Creed says.


We grow it, we waste it, we dump it: fighting food waste one click at a time
 Read more
After a second successful Kickstarter campaign, the friends expanded into Melbourne, supplying mushrooms to restaurants and selling “coffee mushroom boxes” that allow people to grow mushrooms at home.

“We are putting people back in charge of growing their own food again, in a simple way,” Creed says.

Their company Life Cykel has since diverted more than 10 tonnes of coffee waste from landfill and grown more than 1,600kg of mushrooms.

Life Cykel is now building partnerships with a range of organisations including Virgin Airlines, which supplies the coffee grounds from its airport business lounge. Virgin offers the mushroom boxes as a reward on its Velocity frequent flyer program.

Life Cykel has also partnered with New Zealand’s Abilities Group, which provides meaningful work to people with disabilities. In June, Abilities Group will help the company expand to New Zealand by replicating the Australian model.

And Life Cykel is working in various ways with others, including preventive education group Life Education, recycling group Redcycle and Melbourne University. Creed says: “It’s overwhelming the number of groups that believe in our vision and want to do it together.”