What will happen to farmers like me when Brexit turns our industry upside down?

I manage a mixed 500 hectare farm in Northamptonshire growing cereals, and supporting a beef and sheep enterprise. As the weeks went by during the Brexit referendum campaign, it became clear that the plight of British agriculture was something of a footnote, occasionally referenced by remain and leave politicians as a means of supporting their view. However, it is hard to think of any other sectors more affected by the vote to leave the EU than agriculture.

What is now clear is just how much the EU, along with its rules and regulations, has become central to agriculture over the past 25 years – and for good reason. Agriculture is complicated; it oversees the food we eat and the environment we live in. It is, in many respects, an appropriate competence for the EU. But no more – our government is now left with the task of repatriating all these rules, within a department, Defra, that has seen huge cuts to its operations over the past seven years.


Brexit could wipe out Welsh farming, says union
 Read more
There are inevitable impacts that will come from being out of the EU. The withdrawal from the common agricultural policy is one; alongside wondering what will replace it (if anything at all). We are not helped by the fact that we do not have a basic policy direction from any party as to what they envisage for farming. The current scheme pays farmers in the UK a flat rate payment per hectare in return for meeting basic standards. We are currently doing our application for the basic payment scheme, which provides grants and payments for the farming industry, and I cannot help but wonder how many farms will survive without them.

The other biggest impact will come from trade deals. We are blessed to live in an era of accessible and cheap food. Outside the single market, with no trade deals, it is hard to see how there can be no knock-on effect to the price of food – either imported or home-grown. Though higher food prices would appear a good thing for us farmers, input costs would rise for currently tariff-free items such as feed, fertiliser, pesticides and agricultural machinery. Not to mention that governments usually do not like increased food prices, and I fear it could bring about a cheap food agenda that sacrifices basic standards.

This brings me to an important point: standards. We are, rightly, prevented from importing a number of different foods and products from outside the European Union because they do not meet set standards. Reports of possible new bilateral trade deals being done with non-EU countries leave me very fearful that we will have to compete in a marketplace where food is being produced to standards that are much lower than our own, and possibly even illegal if we were to do that here. Hormones in beef cattle, ractopamine in pigs and bromated flour are all such examples of this, and for me no one wins in this scenario.

Another concern is employment. The vote to leave the EU centred heavily on immigration, and migrant labour from the EU, and we have to be mindful of that. However if there are restrictions placed on foreign workers it will have huge knock-on effects for fresh produce, horticulture and pig sectors that rely on a mix of seasonal and permanent workers from abroad.

 Of course farmers fear Brexit, but it could save the British countryside
George Monbiot
George Monbiot  Read more
With changes to support funding and trade deals, there will be uncertainty, but I think there will be opportunities. Some have said with more farmers likely to leave the sector, more land could become available for expanding businesses or new entrants to farming. I am sure Brexit could force many to find alternative income streams or fundamentally change their business model to grow different crops. For example, I know a number of farms that are growing crops for ornamental and pharmaceutical purposes.

We now have an opportunity where farming and the rest of the population can be brought closer together, as decisions over farming and environmental funding are repatriated. It will help us to ask the public what they want their farmers to be. Business people? Food providers? Environmentalists? Whatever the answer to these questions, it will have an inevitable impact on how our countryside is farmed and managed. In areas where farming is more challenging, such as upland areas, support payments have arguably allowed farming families to maintain and manage some of our most iconic landscapes.

Another opportunity is to rationalise some legislation. There is no getting around it, some EU legislation makes little sense. In many cases it does not fit the UK’s environmental or agricultural models and prolonged decision making processes lead to constant uncertainty. Decisions over water quality, approving or rejecting plant protection products or fungicides, GMOs and animal welfare will now have to be taken at a UK level, and for me this is a good thing – irrespective of where you stand. 