Satellite eye on Earth

Every so often, a vibrant green colour infuses the waters of Lake Maracaibo. Floating vegetation – likely duckweed – was swirling in the Venezuelan lake when Nasa’s Aqua satellite flew over in February 2017. Most of the time, Maracaibo’s waters are stratified into layers, with nutrient-rich, cooler, saltier water at the bottom, and a warmer, fresher layer near the surface. But after heavy rains, the layers can mix and make the lake an ideal habitat for plant growth. A narrow strait roughly 6km (4 miles) wide and 40 km (25 miles) long connects the lake to the Gulf of Venezuela and the Caribbean Sea. The influx of saltwater through the strait makes Maracaibo an estuarine lake. This mixing causes the water currents responsible for the concentric swirl pattern, according to Lawrence Kiage, a professor of geoscience at Georgia State University.

Iran’s Musa Bay at the northern end of the Persian Gulf is pictured in this image. Near the centre is the port city of Bandar Imam Khomeini, situated at the terminus of the Trans-Iranian Railway – a route that links the Persian Gulf with Iran’s capital, Tehran. The dark area to the right of the port is Musa Bay, a shallow estuary. The large geometric structures along the top appear to be evaporation ponds for extracting naturally occurring minerals from the ground. The left side of the image is dominated by the marshes and mudflats of the Shadegan wildlife refuge. It is the largest wetland in Iran and plays a significant role in the natural ecology of the area. The area provides a wintering habitat for a wide variety of migratory birds and is the most important site in the world for a rare species of aquatic bird: the marbled duck. The northern part of the wetland is a vital freshwater habitat for many endangered species and is considered a wetland of international importance.

A stunning true-colour image of cloud vortices over the island of Jeju-do, South Korea. The swirling, paisley-like patterns are formed by the turbulence created when southward-flowing air strikes the broad face of Hallasan – a tall, broad-faced mountain that rises to 6,400 feet. The turbulent wind causes the clouds to flow in large, spinning eddies known as von Kármán vortex streets. Such patterns occur in many situations, such as the vibration of car antenna at specific speeds, or wind impacting buildings. The size and shape of the eddies formed by the unsteady flow of a fluid around blunt bodies can be predicted with good accuracy via mathematical formulas, and this aspect of fluid dynamics is important in science, meteorology, and engineering. Only when clouds are present, however, is this beautiful pattern visible in the atmosphere.

These natural-colour images beautifully demonstrate the variety of ice types that can form in the northern Caspian Sea, which stretches about 1,000km (600 miles) from Kazakhstan to Iran. In the north, temperatures are colder and the water is fresher (less saline) and shallower. As a result, northern areas are more prone to freezing in wintertime.

The first image shows the north-western Caspian where it meets western Kazakhstan. The brown areas are part of the Volga delta. Just offshore, in the shallowest parts (only metres deep), a well-developed expanse of consolidated ice appears white. Farther offshore, a large field of old hummocked, white and grey-white ice has detached. (When pieces of ice are pushed together, some ice is forced upward and downward into so-called “hummocks”.) This ice is slowly drifting in a giant polynya covered by young, thin ice (nilas).

Grounded ice is particularly apparent in the second, false-colour image. Orange depicts where the surface is warmer, which tends to be where the ice is thinnest; blues and whites are colder areas, including the main ice pack and grounded ice. With the advance of spring and rising temperatures, ice on the Caspian will soon disappear. All of the ice is first-year ice, meaning that it should not survive the summer. But with the melting of the ice, a different picture can emerge: the keels of hummocked ice that once reached all the way to the seafloor can leave behind scour marks.

Manufacturing plants and industrial ponds outside Ningbo, China, extend into the mud flats of Hangzhou Bay. The area is known as the Ningbo Hangzhou Bay New Zone – an economic development zone established by the local government in 2001.

A clear view of the whole Antarctic peninsula, the northernmost arm of the continent and one of the largest contributors to sea-level rise during the past half-century. In winter, darkness hides much of this rocky, ice-covered strip of the Antarctic peninsula; in the summer, clouds usually block the view. But every now and then, usually in January or February, there is enough of a break in the clouds to get a good glimpse. The ice-covered and mountainous peninsula stretches 1,300km (800 miles) into the Southern Ocean. Some geologists think that millions of years ago the mountains may have connected to the Andes.

As with most of Antarctica, the feature that dominates the peninsula and the ocean surrounding it is ice. There is ice on land: the glaciers and ice sheets. There are thick slabs of floating ice that fan out along the coasts: the ice shelves. There are blocky chunks of floating ice that break off, or calve, into the sea – icebergs. Finally, there is often a thin crust of sea ice that forms on the ocean surface in cold weather. Just a few percent of the peninsula’s land area is ice-free, and in some places the ice is as much as 500 metres thick. The rare exposed areas (brown) are mainly isolated crags and mountain peaks – nunataks – that poke up through the ice layer.

A natural-colour image of haze over Bangladesh. Cooking stoves are a significant contributor to poor air quality in Bangladesh, particularly in the winter when meteorological conditions tend to trap pollution near the surface. Nearly 3 billion people around the world use traditional cooking stoves that burn charcoal, coal, wood, crop residue, or animal dung. Though such solid fuels are cheap and readily available, they emit harmful pollutants that liquid fuels – propane, butane, and kerosene – do not. For this reason, many government agencies, public health advocates, and environmental groups are racing to provide cleaner options in countries where traditional cooking stoves are still common.

Two days after dust was lofted into the air over the Sahara on 20 February, it blew north into Spain and Europe. As particles settled en masse on the snow-covered peaks of Spain’s Sierra Nevada, they left the mountains a very different colour. Satellites captured images of the mountains before and after the dust settled. The ski trails in Pradollano, Spain (left) stand out as white streaks amid the tan dust. (See a wider view of the two images below.) Climbers encountered the dust as they trekked over the mountains, and skiers faced dusty conditions. It is not uncommon for African dust to reach Spain, said Colin Seftor, an atmospheric scientist. “Sometimes you see the dust in Italy or all the way into Greece,” he said. “You’ll see this weather pattern that looks like a storm, with that classic comma shape of clouds.” Wind-borne dust can travel far from its source. It can also have effects on snow’s albedo. When the white powder is covered by darker material, such as soot or dust particles, it loses some of its ability to reflect sunlight back into space.

A natural-colour image of the large dust plume streaming from North Africa towards Europe and the Atlantic.

While rainfall is common in north-eastern Argentina from December through February each year, the flooding of soybean fields in that area was dramatic in January 2017, compared to a similar period in January 2015, when no such inundation covers the landscape. The flooding in the world’s third largest soybean-exporting country caused soybean and soymeal prices to hit six-month highs in mid-January on the Chicago Board of Trade, commodity analysts said. Argentina’s Rosario Grains Exchange reported that almost 4m acres of soybeans in that country were damaged by this recent flooding. This image shows a portion of that inundation.

Australia’s largest inland lake, Lake Eyre, is easily recognisable from space, being a large, white-floored lake bed that is usually dry. However, a remarkable, periodic change was visible in February 2017. Tan, green, and blue splotches stretching across the lake bed are the result of flood waters channeled down Warburton Groove. The Warburton Creek enters Lake Eyre at its northern end, and is seen here flooding into the dry lake. The event gave rise to a variety of colours indicating new vegetation, algae-tinted water, and muds transported by the flood water. A smaller discoloured zone appears where the southern arm of the Warburton delta has also spilled water on to the lake floor (centre). In this desert region, flood waters rarely reach the lake, instead evaporating along the way or getting absorbed by dune sand. But after heavy rains in late 2016, floods in rivers like the Warburton and Cooper have managed to reach Lake Eyre after a delay of months as the water slowly rolled across the vast watershed. The lake is now formally known as Kati Thanda–Lake Eyre.

The shallow, braided channels of the Waimakariri river twist through New Zealand’s Canterbury Plains and Eyrewell Forest and flow into Pegasus Bay and the Pacific.

The alluvial plains of the Waimakariri contain pastureland and sod farms. Near the shallow, wide riverbed, some farmers keep paddocks and fields where cattle graze; Christchurch gets much of its milk from dairy farms around the river. The poorly drained soils also lend themselves to sod farming.

The snow-fed river, which has its source in the Southern Alps, has a highly variable flow and sporadic flooding. Even so, the nearby terrain is susceptible to dry periods. Some fields farther from the river are irrigated by centre-pivot sprinklers, which form a circular pattern when the landscape is viewed from above.

The Eyrewell Forest pine plantations were established in the late 1920s. New Zealand’s dense stands of pinus radiata grow for more than 25 years before they are harvested, and the trees can stand up to 40 metres (130 feet) tall. Patches of older pines grow alongside younger ones, as well as stands of native species such as kanuka trees.

Although bucolic and green, the Canterbury Plains are not always calm. Strong winds occasionally wipe out forests, which tend to grow in strips parallel to the wind flow. Winds toppled thousands of trees in the area in 1945, 1964, and 1975. The winds often blow in from the north-west, perpendicular to the Southern Alps, and increase in speed as they roll downhill. The soil beneath Eyrewell Forest is shallow and has compacted gravel beneath, preventing trees from developing deep roots.

These colour-enhanced composite images in 2016 and 2017 show how much the recent West Coast rains have swollen California’s lakes and rivers downslope of the Sierra Mountains.

The first image shows the state of California’s lakes and rivers when a large portion of the state was, according to the National Drought Monitor, suffering from “extreme” to “exceptional” drought. The second tells a different story. A significant difference in the width of the rivers suggests just how much water the series of recent storms added to them. Not surprisingly, current Drought Monitor statistics now show most of the state to be free from drought.

A clear view of California reveals more than just the expanse of the Golden Gate Bridge, Park, and Bay Bridge, but also the dramatic sediment pulled from the 4,600 sq miles of the San Francisco Bay watershed.

In the past few years, the title of “largest solar farm in the world” has been a rather short-lived distinction. In 2014, the Topaz solar farm in California topped the list with its 550 megawatt (MW) facility. In 2015, another operation in California, Solar Star, edged its capacity up to 579MW. By 2016, India’s Kamuthi solar power project in Tamil Nadu was on top with 648MW of capacity. As of February 2017, Longyangxia Dam solar park in China was the new leader, with 850MW of capacity. These images show how the solar park grew over a four-year period. By January 2017, solar panels covered 27 sq km (10 sq miles) of Qinghai province. According to news reports, there were nearly 4m solar panels at the site in 2017. The rapid expansion at Longyangxia coincides with China’s fast-growing solar power sector. In 2016, China’s total installed capacity doubled to 77 gigawatts. It is unlikely that Longyangxia will remain the largest solar park in the world for long. A project planned for the Ningxia region in north-west China will have a capacity of 2,000MW when it is finished, Bloomberg reported.