Thinner than pencils, lighter than lunch boxes: meet the next generation of laptop computers

TODAY’S laptops are travel-friendly, sleek, and often ready to stand in for a tablet or a TV.
If you haven’t updated your most mobile computer recently, the new generation is worth consideration, and at least a solid window-shop.

Razer Blade Stealth
It’s cheaper and more powerful than its Apple rival, and a step up from the last skinny Razer notebook. This 12.5-inch laptop features a stunning 4K touchscreen, adds a battery that is 15 per cent larger than before, and uses the latest Intel Core i7 chip. It can also be boosted with up to 16GB RAM and a terabyte of solid-state storage, features a chroma keyboard that can light up in fun patterns, and weighs just 1.29kg. The new Blade Stealth is more than just a gaming laptop and well worth considering by anyone who wants a 1.31cm-thick laptop made by a company other than Apple.

Acer Spin 7
At under 11mm thick and billed as the thinnest hybrid laptop on the market, there is a lot to like about this convertible computer’s solid design that uses a 360-degree hinge to fold its bright 14-inch screen over into tablet mode. Its USB-C ports, which enable the thin design, necessitate dealing with dongles but the convenience of a device that is just 1.2kg will appeal to those who carry their computer everywhere.

Dell Alienware 15
That’s not a computer. This is a computer. Dell’s latest gaming machine is positively huge at 3.49kg and 2.5cm thick, but you get a lot in that package. This luggable laptop features an Intel Core i7 chip, 16GB RAM, a 256GB solid-state drive for booting and an extra one terabyte drive for storage, as well as a 6GB Nvidia graphics card. The sum is a machine that barely pauses during everyday use, and one powerful enough to run advanced virtual reality games like those from Oculus and HTC. Its keyboard also excels, with more travel than typical, and a generously sized trackpad makes everything easier to navigate. Its screen lets this computer down somewhat, though, as its full high-definition resolution and brightness can look dimmer than desirable.

Toshiba Portege X20
Toshiba labels its latest hybrid a five-in-one device thanks to a solid hinge that transforms it from a laptop into a tablet, and adds other angles and uses in between. Powered by either an Intel i5 or i7 chi[, is has USB-C and Thunderbolt ports (adaptors), Harman/Kardon speakers, and a stylus. The 12.5-inch Corning Gorilla Glass screen offers better protection than some hybrid devices but, surprisingly given this is pitched as a premium unit, the screen’s resolution is merely high definition.

Asus Zenbook 3 UX305
This is an undeniably sexy machine with well-considered design details, including a fingerprint scanner on its touchpad. There’s just one large caveat: with just one USB-C port you will want to add a dock for greater options. Other negatives include the 12-inch display not being touch-sensitive and less than all-day battery life, but this Zenbook has style to match the Apple MacBook and a body less than 12mm thick.