Battle on the adverbials front: grammar advisers raise worries about Sats tests and teaching
The panel of four who advised Michael Gove on the primary spelling and grammar test now have reservations

The spelling, punctuation and grammar (Spag) tests, which 10- and 11-year-olds are sitting, caused a storm when they were introduced last summer. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock
 View more sharing options
Shares
1,409
Comments
170
Warwick Mansell
Tuesday 9 May 2017 07.30 BST Last modified on Tuesday 9 May 2017 09.20 BST
This morning, more than half a million primary children will take a test that may ask them to identify the grammatical label for the two-word phrase at the start of this paragraph. Could you do it? If you are unable to recognise this as a “fronted adverbial” then you will have fallen short on knowledge expected of 10- and 11-year-olds in the controversial spelling, punctuation and grammar (Spag) tests.

 Dear Ms Morgan: Sats tests are putting young children through hell
Michael Rosen
 Read more
The term, which even professional writers such as the novelist AL Kennedy have said they are not familiar with, has been at the centre of a fierce debate over the grammar requirements in Sats tests and the curriculum they assess.

Now Richard Hudson, the academic who says he bears most responsibility for introducing the fronted adverbial, has said the process through which the national curriculum was changed under Michael Gove, the former education secretary, was “chaotic”. He admits it was not based on good research evidence and says he feels many teachers are not equipped to teach it.

Hudson’s comments mean that all four of an expert panel that advised the government on placing greater emphasis on traditional grammar in its primary curriculum now have serious reservations about either the tests, or the curriculum development process.

The fronted adverbial is defined in the national curriculum as (deep breath) “a word or phrase that is used, like an adverb, to modify a verb or clause and has been moved in front of the verb or clause”. It has become emblematic of a fierce dispute over grammar teaching and the role of politicians, teachers and academics in shaping it.

The government’s key curriculum adviser, Tim Oates, has already warned that the Spag tests, introduced last May, “need a rethink” as there was a “genuine problem about undue complexity of demand” in terms of the “language about language” that children were expected to know.


Primary tests would have stumped Jane Austen, says teacher
 Read more
In fact, although pupils take national tests including the term “fronted adverbial” at the end of primary school, since 2014 England’s national curriculum has expected children to be able to understand it from year 4, when they are eight or nine. Meanwhile, “subordinate clauses” should be known and labelled correctly from the age of seven, “determiners” from age eight, and “modal verbs” and “relative clauses” from age nine.

David Crystal, one of Britain’s foremost English language academics, has argued that the Spag test, and the view of language lying behind it, “turns the clock back half a century”. There is too much emphasis on linguistic labelling as an end in itself, he says, rather than on using this as the starting point in discussions of effective writing.

Michael Rosen, the children’s author and Education Guardian columnist, has said we are suffering from “terminology-itis”: a mistaken belief that talking about grammatical structures will improve pupils’ writing. It’s a waste of children’s time, he says.

How did the teaching and testing of grammar in its current form come about? Ministers have never published a list of who advised them, but we have identified and spoken to key players.

 Richard Hudson
 Richard Hudson. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian
Four people – three of them university academics – advised on the place of grammar in the national curriculum for primary schools, we discovered: Debra Myhill, director of the centre for research in writing at the University of Exeter; Dick Hudson, emeritus professor of linguistics at University College, London; Ronald Carter, research professor of modern English language at Nottingham University; and Geoff Barton, a former English teacher who heads the Association of School and College Leaders.

Hudson, who also advises ministers on the detail of the Spag tests, wrote a glossary of grammatical terms that is included in the curriculum. He says he “probably” came up with the suggestion that “fronted adverbial” be included as a teaching requirement. He still defends the tests, saying: “The proof of the pudding is in the eating, and most children do fine in the Spag tests. That’s just fact.” Some 73% passed last year, and Hudson says the curriculum’s stipulation that pupils know 40 grammatical terms is not onerous.

 Debra Myhill
 Debra Myhill
But he does admit there was “chaos” in the process of developing what is a controversial curriculum. “To give you an idea of how chaotic things were, when [the curriculum panel] was originally put together, we had about four meetings and were supposed to be devising a grammar curriculum to cover the whole of compulsory education: primary and secondary.

“We started off with the primary curriculum, which we were a bit unconfident about as none of us had much experience of primary education [Myhill had in fact done some research into grammar in primary schools], and were looking forward to getting stuck into the real thing: secondary.

“Then the DfE pulled the plug by saying: ‘We are not going to do any secondary curriculum.’ So what was published [the primary curriculum] was meant to be about building the foundations for the real thing. But that’s all there is.”

 Geoff Barton
 Geoff Barton
He is deeply troubled by this. “That’s terribly worrying, because it means that all the work children do in primary is wasted, as they probably won’t take it on in secondary.” The Department for Education did publish a secondary English curriculum, but it is much slimmer, and the panel was not involved.

The emphasis on grammatical terminology has also been criticised by academics as not based on good research that it helps children’s writing. Asked whether there was any evidence at the time that a greater emphasis on traditional grammar was developmentally appropriate for children, Hudson says: “No, there was no evidence, and we were guessing. But I think we were right.”

Hudson says his main concern is not the tests’ content, but that the DfE was expecting an increased emphasis on traditional grammar without seeking to improve teachers’ own grammatical understanding, which he says is often substandard. “The DfE says training is the responsibility of the schools. This is really washing their hands of it, saying ‘it’s not our problem’.”

Meanwhile, Education Guardian has learned that Myhill wants the Spag tests to be scrapped.


More primary school children suffering stress from Sats, survey finds
 Read more
In a submission to the Commons committee published last week, she wrote that the tests should be discontinued “because they serve no valid educational purpose”, that the test design was seriously flawed, and that “children are developing grammatical misconceptions … caused by an over-emphasis on naming and identifying [terms] for test purposes”.

Myhill has published research that finds grammar teaching can help pupils’ writing, but only if taught in a way that links meaningfully to how they write. She fears the tests are pushing children in the wrong direction. “There is no evidence that simply being able to name and identify linguistic terminology has any effect on your use of language,” she says.

Meanwhile, Barton has described the Spag tests as “woeful”. And Carter, the fourth panel member, said last year that the tests led to an overemphasis on written grammar in the curriculum.

Dominic Wyse, an expert on literacy from Institute of Education at University College London says: “There is no evidence whatsoever that teaching kids things like subordinate clauses benefits their writing.”

Bas Aarts, another UCL academic grammarian who is consulted on the detail of the Spag tests and has supported the government’s approach, says he is “not here to defend the tests”.

 Dear Ms Morgan: in grammar there isn’t always one right answer
Michael Rosen
 Read more
“For me, the important thing is that grammar is on the curriculum. English language is part of everyone’s experience, and to know the structure of it is really important. The tests have been by no means perfect. But you do need to have a test because, as we know, if you do not test something, it will not be taught.”

He also believes that the exercise may be undermined by the lack of government-backed training for teachers.

Last week, the Conservative-led Commons education select committee added its voice to concerns, saying that the tests focused too much on technical aspects of writing and too little on creativity, and calling on ministers to scrap them as statutory assessments.

With reservations about the tests seemingly widespread, is there any prospect that they could change in the near future? Asked if the DfE had responded to his criticisms last year, Oates says: “I have had a whole series of meetings [with officials] and I am reassured that they have taken the concerns very seriously,” implying perhaps that tweaks to the tests may follow.

A spokesman for the DfE says only: “Spelling, punctuation and grammar are the cornerstones of effective written communication. We want all pupils to gain these skills to a good standard.”