Students should not have to worry about graduate employment while at university, outgoing head of UCAS says

University students should not feel compelled to get a job until six months after graduating, the outgoing head of UCAS has said as she warned against the “obsession” with careers.

Middle class parents and universities have become “too fixated” with using their degrees to get a job, Mary Curnock Cook suggested.

Instead parents should encourage their children move back home and explore their options before embarking on a career.

Speaking to The Daily Telegraph in one of her final interviews before stepping down at the end of this month, Ms Curnock Cook said: "You have plenty of time to figure out how to be successful in the workplace, so I think obsession with graduate employment within six months is unhelpful.

“Graduates have still got to learn how to function in corporate and working life. Once employed, if they’re good, they’ll get promoted really quickly.”

While the head of the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) says higher education is the “best option” open to young people, she cautions against the career-driven mentality that many students have when choosing a degree.

“We spend less than a decade in total in secondary and higher education and young people going into work today are probably going to spend five decades of more in that environment,” Ms Curnock Cook said.

“I think there’s still this common trail of thought which is ‘go to university - it’s the golden thread to your career’.

“But I think you get the best out of a university experience when you study something that just sets your brain on fire. Something that motivates you, that gets you really engaged with the subject.

“It’s about broadening your horizons, it’s too utilitarian to think you’ve got to go to university and then land a career straight after that. It’s terribly unhelpful.

“Students may need to take some down-time after the stresses of finals and dissertations. I don't think there's any harm in doing temporary, voluntary or non-graduate work to fill the gap before finding something more permanent.”

Her comments come during a period of growing competition in the jobs market, as employers struggle to distinguish between graduate applicants due to record numbers - three in four - receiving a degree classification of 2:1 or better last year.

The Higher Education Policy Institute has warned that 'grade inflation' risks diluting the attractiveness of a degree in the eyes of employers, with companies including Ernst and Young and publishers Penguin Random House UK dropping degree requirements from their selection criteria.

Meanwhile, Government figures for 2016 revealed a 2.2 per cent drop the number of 21 to 30-year-old graduates in skilled work compared with a year earlier.

About one-in-five graduates were in low or medium skilled jobs on average across the whole of the working population.

Her concerns are shared by other leaders in the sector, with a recent survey of university students showing that one in four suffer from mental health problems during their degree, while 39 per cent say that finding a job is a source of anxiety and stress.

Meanwhile, separate research by YouGov and the University of Southampton has shown that the combination of parental expectation, growing student debts and challenging job market conditions are contributing to the problem.

Ms Curnock Cook left school at 16 before beginning employment working as a secretary to a Cambridge professor. She rapidly moved up the career ladder and became marketing director of Food from Britain in 1988, aged just 30.

She has since headed up organisations including Bll, the professional body for licensed retailing; the Qualification and Curriculum Authority, and served as a council member on the Further Education Funding Council.

And while she did eventually attend university as a mature student, gaining an MSc in Business from the London Business School in 2002, she claims that it should not be seen as the “be-all-end-all.”

“I started out as a secretary, and I just loved work and secondly I worked really hard. Because I was interested in it and prepared to put effort in, and luckily I turned out to be good at it, I progressed," she said.

“But there is still an echo in the middle-class psyche that going to university is the best way into a career.

“The thing that I think is dangerous is that it’s become so much the norm and students just do it because everyone expects them to do it - I’ve used the term sleepwalking before.

“It’s a treadmill of education after secondary schools and GCSEs. If university isn’t a positive decision and an informed choice then it can be a disaster.

“Whoever you are, whatever your background, when you’re making that decision it needs to be made consciously and proactively. For a lot of young people it’s the first adult decision that they’ll make. It’s a life-changing decision.”

Ms Curnock Cook will be replaced by Clare Marchant, the current head of Worcestershire County Council, at the beginning of May.

She will continue in her position as governor at Swindon Academy, and as trustee of the Access Project and the National Star College.