Universities will see their funding increase after Brexit, education select committee says

Universities will see their funding increase after Brexit, the education select committee has told academics.

In a report published on Tuesday, MPs noted that once Britain has left the EU,  universities will no longer be able to draw funds from the European Structural and Investment Funds.

But since the UK is a “net contributor” to these funds, the Government could set up its own regional growth fund after Brexit which “could easily exceed” the amount of investment that universities traditionally received from the EU.

The report, titled Exiting the EU: challenges and opportunities for higher education, noted: "It is likely structural funding will be a casualty of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU, as these funds are distributed only to EU members."

It said that the UK received £1.67 billion from European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and European Social Fun (ESF) in 2014/15, which is only 29 per cent of the amount the British Government pays in.

In a submission to the select committee, the University Alliance said that the ERDF and ESF hand out around £100 million each year in British universities to fund projects promoting enterprise and growth in their local area. But if the Government set up a new fund, far more could be invested in universities.  

MPs also identified the Government’s immigration policy and European staff as priorities for universities during Brexit negotiations.

Alistair Jarvis, Deputy Chief Executive of Universities UK, said: “The Government should seek to secure continued close collaboration with EU research partners and also provide certainty for EU staff currently working in UK universities in terms of work and residency rights.  

“Changes to our immigration system are also needed to ensure that the UK remains a destination of choice for international talent and students.

“As large and complex organisations, universities plan for years down the line, so it important that we receive clarity of the Government’s positions on these crucial issues as soon as possible.”  

The report also said that The Department for Education, along with the Home Office and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy should publish a contingency plan for higher education, so that they are prepared for a “no deal” situation.