Young people will continue to get a raw deal in Westminster unless they vote

One of the joys of working in a school is witnessing young people espouse so many good causes with such energy and determination.

Every week, I see boys and girls at Brighton College raising money for cancer research, campaigning for human rights, demanding curbs on diesel pollution and devoting evenings to feeding the homeless and afternoons to visiting the elderly. I have been a teacher for 25 years and, without doubt, today’s young people are the most engaged I have ever seen.

But now, it seems they have stopped voting.

In 1992, 67.3 per cent of registered voters aged 18-24 turned up at the polling stations. In every election since, the turnout of young voters has not risen above 56 per cent, with particularly low levels of engagement during the Blair years.

Meanwhile, older generations have continued to cast their ballots. In the recent referendum, according to data analysed by the London School of Economics, 64 per cent of 18-24 year-olds voted compared to 90 per cent of those aged 65 and over.

And in the 2015 general election, the British Social Attitudes survey showed that 56 per cent of 18-24 year-olds exercised their right to vote compared to 84 per cent of those aged 65 and over.

The consequences of this disengagement from formal politics should worry us all.

First of all, it diminishes the memory of those in the  relatively recent past who sacrificed so much in the fight for the right to vote. I wonder how those suffragettes and chartists would view a generation that takes for granted something that was won with such difficulty.

And what example does it set for those beyond these shores, in lands where democratic freedoms are denied yet where brave men and women keep the flame of liberty alive in the hope that one day they too will have the rights that too many of us so carelessly discard?

Secondly, this disengagement is hurting the young. Politicians respond to the needs not of their constituents but of their voters. And the elderly and the retired are much more likely to vote. Little wonder, therefore, that governments have protected the interests of the older generation over that of their children and grandchildren.

George Osborne told us that in the battle to cut the country’s bloated debt, we were all in this together. We never were. Pensioners – even wealthy pensioners – continued to enjoy protections and allowances that were denied to others in society, with the result that the typical pensioner household income today is now higher than that of the average working household.


Meanwhile, average student debt has soared to £44,000, more young adults than ever are living at home, with the number of 25-34 year olds buying their own home down one-third in just ten years.

Thirdly, it is bad for democracy. Today’s young people are, in my experience, more focused, more caring and frankly better educated than those I encountered earlier in my teaching career. Surveys show that they are also much less likely to smoke, drink or take drugs. We would all benefit from their being more engaged in the formal political process.

But who is really to blame here? Not the older generation which turns out to vote in consistently high numbers. Nor even the politicians who are merely responding to the electoral mathematics. At fault are those like me who need to devote more time than we do to persuade youngsters in our schools that their vote really does matter.

And ultimately, young people themselves must take the rap. If they really want to create a better future – and I believe they have the ability and compassion to do just that – they need to engage in the formal electoral process. They need to get on their bikes and vote.