Sunglasses briefly come off as Vogue's Anna Wintour is made a dame
Famously enigmatic editor of American fashion magazine receives honour from the Queen at Buckingham Palace ceremony

Anna Wintour, the editor-in-chief of American Vogue, has been made a dame at Buckingham Palace.

Wintour, 67, who has headed up the magazine for almost 30 years, was honoured in the diplomatic and overseas list for services to fashion and journalism.

She wore her trademark sunglasses to the palace but removed them before entering the ballroom, where she received the award from the Queen.

The famously enigmatic editor smiled broadly after the ceremony, which she attended with her daughter Bee Shaffer, describing the award as “extra special”.

She also revealed that the Queen had struggled to attach the insignia to her pink, belted Chanel outfit during the ceremony.

“She couldn’t find where to put the brooch,” she said. “I congratulated her on Prince Philip’s service because obviously that’s so remarkable and such an inspiration to us all.”

Wintour also lavished praise on other members of the royal family. “I think everyone in the United States has such admiration for the British royal family, and with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge there’s a whole new interest in the younger generation,” she said.

“She has such style and she’s so charming. They seem so real and authentic, which I think is the right way to be today.”

Wintour edited British Vogue between 1985 and 1987. She took the helm of the flagship US edition in 1988. Known for her flawless sense of style and trademark bob haircut, she has become a familiar face on fashion show front rows.

She was born in London but later became a US citizen. “Obviously this is a city that I grew up in, a city that I have so much affection and love for,” she said. “It’s always wonderful to get an award, but this one is extra special.”

Wintour was among a host of distinguished figures who were honoured by the Queen during the service, including the former bishop of Liverpool James Jones. 

He said it was an “extraordinary moment” to receive a knighthood for his services to bereaved families and justice, after chairing the Hillsborough Independent Panel.

“Although I’m very honoured, I’m also very mindful of all those who’ve been bereaved through tragedy and have suffered injustice,” he said.

The Times political cartoonist Peter Brookes, 73, was made a CBE, and rock’n’roll star Marty Wilde, 78, was made an MBE, along with the Olympic gold medallists Matt Langridge, Constantine Louloudis and George Nash after their success in rowing at the Rio Games.

A police officer who risked his life during a shootout with a gang member in Tottenham, north London, in 2014 was also recognised. Martin Finney received the George Medal, the second-highest civil award for bravery.