Get Ready for Fall Fashion

All That Glitters
Designers are doing double duty as miners. A week after a dozen Hollywood stars descended upon the Oscars red carpet flaunting 24-carat gowns (think Dakota Johnson, Nicole Kidman and Emma Stone), designers here offered catwalk solutions more geared toward shining off duty than in the spotlight.

At Paco Rabanne, the label behind the legendary 1960s chain-mail dress, Julien Dossena used the fabric in simple T-shirt and midlength skirt cuts to create modern, sophisticated and slippery separates. Isabel Marant dressed Gigi Hadid in cascading silver frills, but took the look down a notch by matching the top with studded rhinestone skinny jeans (plus silver socks and open-toe sandals).

Dries Van Noten paired an iridescent green blazer over a long beige turtleneck and cropped bronze culottes, while David Koma at Mugler sexed things up with bold pointed-shoulder silver tuxedo dresses with black silk cutaways.

In uncertain times where everyone is looking to be dazzled — and for a dose of escapism — the underlying message appears to be: Show your metal.

Mad Hatters
Forget a slogan T-shirt or statement handbag. This season, the must-have conversation piece is a hat.

Faith Connexion took a more tempered approach with jaunty black fedoras or gauchos that could be worn anytime and anywhere, though the same couldn’t be said of Andreas Kronthaler for Vivienne Westwood, where models wore trash bonnets or white helmets laden with giant white spikes.

Wild plumed fascinators, face jewelry and ceremonial headgear capped things off at the Tokyo-based label Undercover, while at Maison Margiela, John Galliano turned things upside down by proposing that your tote become a top hat.

Think Pink
From flamingo to fuchsia, sherbet to shocking, pink continues to be ubiquitous on the runways.

It was there at Nina Ricci, in a Pepto-Bismol pink Mongolian lamb coat and sequined skirt, and at Balenciaga with heavy lashings of raspberry ruffle and clashing sock-booties.

At Loewe, Jonathan Anderson slightly offset the color’s saccharine undertones by finishing a pink-and-white candy-print dress with black straps and matching leather boots, while Elie Saab took a more-is-more approach, using a pale-pink shade that his show notes referred to as “whisper-light sugar, as if from a maiden’s blushed cheek.”

If not handled with care, this obsession with La Vie en Rose could give many a toothache.

Leatherbound
In uncertain times we crave protection, so Paris designers leathered up this season, offering tough outerwear with a newly refined edge.

At Akris, Albert Kriemler sent out ladylike proportions and rich finish — think sweeping olive green coats with tapered waists lined with soft furs, or an oversize reworking of the bomber jacket with black leather sleeves and luxe knitted body. Acne texture-blocked by way of a black leather trouser and jacket combo, offset by billowing silk bell sleeves. And Vanessa Seward offered shelter via a butterscotch long-sleeved zip-up tunic, which exuded utilitarian elegance.

It was at Saint Laurent, however, where Anthony Vaccarello paired enormous detached shearling-lined sleeves with tiny dresses and turtlenecks alike, that armor really took on new meaning.