Storm to spread snow from Michigan to Pennsylvania, West Virginia

While snow was contained to northern New England for the first half of the week, wintry precipitation will sneak into the Midwest and mid-Atlantic during the second half of the week.

“Winter weather is not quite over with just yet,” said AccuWeather Meteorologist Brett Rathbun.

Rain will become mixed with and then change to snow from near the shores of Lake Michigan Wednesday night to the central and southern Appalachians Thursday night and Friday.

April came in like a lamb with days of temperatures reaching into the 50s and 60s F across the Midwest and mid-Atlantic. However, that will change as a major storm moves into Northeast.

Snow, accompanied by chilly winds will spread southeastward and impact cities including Detroit, Cleveland, Toronto, Pittsburgh and Charleston, West Virginia. Snow could fall as far west as Chicago and Milwaukee.

Much of northern Indiana, southeastern Michigan, northern and eastern Ohio, western Pennsylvania, West Virginia and southeastern Ontario can expect decreased visibility and slick nighttime conditions to occur as a result.

"Roads will likely remain wet in Chicago, Detroit and Pittsburgh, with any accumulations on non-paved surfaces,” Rathbun said.

Despite the chill and rounds of snow showers expected into Thursday, recent high temperatures in the 50s are expected to prevent snow from accumulating on warm road surfaces in most cases.

“Should any heavier burst of snow occur, roads could quickly become slushy,” Rathbun said. “The most likely areas for snow-packed and slippery roads will be across western and northern Michigan.

A few inches of snow can accumulate on grassy areas and other non-paved, elevated surfaces. Many motorists in the region may need to sweep snow off their car before heading out in the morning.

Those planning to spend a day at the ballgame at Guaranteed Rate Field in Chicago on Thursday afternoon should prepare for strong winds with RealFeel® Temperatures in the low 30s F.

“Any wintry precipitation will be over with in time for the baseball matchup between the Detroit Tigers and the Chicago White Sox, but the players and fans will have to contend with winds gusting between 40-50 mph during the game,” Rathbun said.

Waterproof coats, hats and mittens will protect those at the ballgame from the brisk weather and wet seats.

For those anxiously awaiting the return of springtime weather, warmer weather will return by next week.

“While it will be quite chilly to end the week, a big warmup will arrive later this weekend and into next week,” said Rathbun.

Sunny weather and winds out of the south on Friday will help temperatures rise back into the mid-50s, with highs flirting with the 70-degree mark by the end of the weekend.