2017 Europe summer forecast: Heat to dominate the south; Storms to rattle Germany and Poland

Prolonged heat, including several dangerous heat waves, will be a major issue across southern and eastern Europe throughout the summer.
By contrast, a lack of lasting heat is predicted across the United Kingdom and Ireland.
In between these areas, rounds of thunderstorms will target countries from France to Poland and the Czech Republic.

Dangerous heat waves to build over Italy, Balkans
A long, hot summer is expected across southern Europe as prolonged periods of above-normal to extreme heat take hold from Italy into the Balkan Peninsula.
This will set the stage for several dangerous heat waves throughout the summer months, especially in July and August.
Temperatures over 32 C (90 F) will be common throughout the summer, with at least one period of dangerous heat lasting for more than a week straight.
"Record-setting heat will be possible during the most intense heat waves," said AccuWeather Senior Meteorologist Alan Reppert.
Locations from Macedonia and Bulgaria into Hungary and Romania will face the highest risk for multiple heat waves.

A sunbather takes a shower at Alimos beach near Athens, Monday, July 9, 2012, amid a heat wave. (AP Photo/Petros Giannakouris)

"Another problem that will develop in the region will be smog and poor air quality," AccuWeather Meteorologist Tyler Roys said.
The weather pattern that will promote the extreme heat in southern and eastern Europe will also limit rainfall. This will heighten the risk for drought conditions despite near- to above-normal precipitation from January through April.
Following cold shots during the springtime, crops could continue to suffer across the Balkans due to a lack of rainfall and intense heat throughout the summer.
Powerful storms to erupt from France to Poland
While heat builds throughout southern and eastern Europe for much of the summer, storms will ease the warmth at times from France to Germany and Poland.
Summerlike warmth will occur in these areas; however, lasting heat will be infrequent as rain and thunderstorms develop.
Some of these storms will be severe with damaging winds, hail and isolated tornadoes.
"The most likely time for severe thunderstorms will be in the midafternoon into the early evening," Roys said.
The greatest risk for damaging thunderstorms will stretch from southern Germany into western Czech Republic and western Poland. This includes Munich and Berlin, Germany; Prague, Czech Republic; and Wroclaw, Poland.
The frequency of rain and storms will also heighten the risk for flooding farther west, from France into Switzerland and Germany.
Despite the threat for thunderstorms throughout the season, a lull in precipitation during the second half of summer could yield a short but intense heat wave across western and central Europe.