Reports: Thousands without power as damaging storms blast across Pennsylvania, New York

After violent and destructive storms wreaked havoc across the central and southern US this past weekend, severe weather will the threaten the Northeast through Monday night.
The threat for damaging storms will stretch from from Raleigh, North Carolina, to Burlington, Vermont, with the greatest threat coming along the Interstate 81 corridor.
Hail, damaging winds, heavy downpours and isolated tornadoes are some of the hazards that the storms could produce.

RELATED: 
The difference between tornado watches and warnings 
AccuWeather Severe Weather Center 
Photos: Central, southern US communities face devastating aftermath of deadly tornadoes, flooding
As of 10:45 p.m. EST, over 81,000 customers across Pennsylvania are without power, according to West Penn Power.
Major damage has been reported around Binghamton, New York, in the wake of severe thunderstorms, including a large tree falling on a house.
Winds gusted to 60 mph as storms rolled through and left over 12,000 without power around Binghampton, according to NYSEG.

A line of severe thunderstorms is approaching Albany, New York from the west with the storms having a history of producing damaging winds.
This line of storms reaches all the way north into Burlington, Vermont and into parts of southern Quebec; however, the worst of the storms will focus on New York.
At 8:17 p.m. EDT Monday, a severe thunderstorm capable of producing a tornado was located near Norwich, New York and was moving northeast toward Morris and New Berlin. 

As if 8 p.m. EDT Monday, over 70,000 electric customers were without power across Pennsylvania, according to First Energy Corp. Many of these outages were related to the severe thunderstorms that have swept across the state since the afternoon.
An additional 16,000 electric customers were without power across upstate and western New York, according to NationalGrid.
A 71-mph wind gust was measured in Williamsport, Pennsylvania at 7:15 p.m. EDT Monday as a line of severe thunderstorms moved through the town.
This line of severe thunderstorms will continue to push eastward into tonight and may bring damaging winds to Scranton, Pennsylvania, and Binghampton and Albany, New York.
Tree damage has been reported around State College, Pennsylvania after a line of severe thunderstorms moved through the area. Winds gusted past 60 mph, bringing down large tree limbs and leading to power outages across the town.

A large tree blocking traffic on North Atherton Street in State College, Pennsylvania. (Photo/Quinn Lease)

A line of gusty thunderstorms is tracking across western New York and is headed toward Syracuse.
A 60-mph wind gust was measured in Oswego, New York, located along the shores of Lake Ontario. 


The front edge of a severe thunderstorm moving into Oswego, New York. (Photo/Anthony Gullotto)

A tree has fallen onto a house in Johnstown, Pennsylvania. No one was injured and the thunderstorms that brought gusty winds have since moved east of the town.

Thousands of people are without power around the Pittsburgh area after a line of damaging storms moved through the area this afternoon.
"The severe weather moving through Western Pennsylvania has knocked out power to approximately 15,000 Duquesne Light customers," Duquesne Light said in a statement.
The severe thunderstorms have ended in Pittsburgh, but it may take hours for crews to restore power as they clear storm damage.

At 4:17 p.m. EDT Monday, a large and extremely dangerous tornado was located near Betula, Pennsylvania, according to the National Weather Service. This is a particularly dangerous situation with damage possible around Crosby and Port Allegany, Pennsylvania. 

As of 4:15 p.m. EDT Monday, over 45,000 electric customers were without power across Pennsylvania, according to First Energy Corp. Many of these outages were across western Pennsylvania where damaging wind gusts have brought down trees and power lines.
Damaging winds have also moved through western New York with a 78-mph wind gust measured near Jamestown, New York by an NWS trained spotter.
There are many reports of tree damage around the Pittsburgh area following a line of severe thunderstorms moving through the city. The Allegheny Country Airport measured a wind gust of 56 mph as the storms blew through.

A line of severe thunderstorms has moved into western Pennsylvania with gusty storms reaching from Erie through Pittsburgh. These storms will disrupt traffic along interstate 80 and the Pennsylvania Turnpike as the storms blast eastward into tonight. 