Ye Olde Bell welcomes new spa for spring 2017

Stylish hotel Ye Olde Bell has announced the opening of a new multimillion pound luxury spa for late spring 2017.

The new 17,000sq ft spa will offer ten hot and cold experiences, including a custom-made ‘snowstorm’ experience, the only one of its kind in the UK.

Also on offer are Sabbia Med Sunlight therapy, steambath, salt cascade room, mud Rasul, Swiss pine sauna, mineralising stonebath, herbal laconium, shower walk and indoor-to-outdoor hydropool.

Located in the rural village of Barnby Moor on the corners of the three counties of Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, and Lincolnshire, but with easy access just off the A1 and a direct train service to London, the modern and elegant spa will feature six treatment rooms, two of which are double, a hair boutique and express salon. 

The spa will also offer a complement of therapeutic and rejuvenating face and body care treatments, using products by top European skincare house, Germaine de Capuccini and boutique British cosmetic brand, Delilah.

Built over two floors, guests arrive at reception through imposing double oak doors where they are greeted by a sweeping hand-carved oak staircase and glass panelling.

Inside the spa, in addition to the experiences, there will be an open fire, numerous relaxation areas, luxurious changing rooms and a stunning bar and restaurant with theatre style kitchen. Outside will feature a garden and relaxation areas. 

The spa itself has been designed in conjunction with Spa Vision by spa directors, Sadie Ardron-Levack and Lizzie Bath. 

The interior design has been led by Hilary Levack and designer Tonia Wynne of Homestead Interiors, both of whom did the full design refurbishment of the hotel.

Ye Olde Bell has been passionately restored by its private owners offering 59 individually styled plush rooms, stunning suites and luxury lodges

Ardron-Levack said: “We are all thrilled about this new venture for Ye Olde Bell and when we open aspire to being recognised as one of the leading spas within the UK.

“We have worked closely with our partners to create a luxurious space that takes our guests on a unique journey.

“We are passionate about understanding our guests and to ensure we provide a spa experience that is bespoke to them, whether this be relaxation, indulgence, wellbeing, invigoration or a combination of all four.

The spa will sit adjacent to the AA Four-Star Rosette hotel and will complement this historic hotel, yet at the same add 21st century contemporary style.