Carnival Cruise Line accused of ‘turning a blind eye’ to animal cruelty in the Cayman Islands

Carnival Cruise Line - one of the world’s biggest cruise companies - has come under fire for sending tens of thousands of its passengers every year on excursions to the Cayman Turtle Centre: Island Wildlife Encounter (CTC), where endangered turtles are allegedly subjected to “appalling” living conditions and are “exploited in the name of tourist entertainment”, including as props for selfies.

The Cayman Islands - a British overseas territory in the Caribbean - is home to around 9,500 endangered green sea turtles. The government-owned CTC, formerly known as the Cayman Turtle Farm (CTF), receives more than 200,000 visitors every year and nearly three-quarters of them are reported to be cruise passengers.

World Animal Protection (WAP), a London-based animal charity, launched a petition last week urging the cruise line to stop operating visits to the facility, which is the only sea-turtle farm in the world to breed turtles for human consumption (turtle meat is served as steaks and burgers at local restaurants, according to WAP). It is also the only farm which in its capacity as an attraction allows tourists to hold turtles.

The Cayman Island facility was named among the world’s top 10 “cruellest attractions” last year in a survey which revealed nearly 110 million people visit them each year, unaware of “behind the scenes” animal abuse, according to WAP.

Visitors to the CTC are said to be “unaware of the... wounds, skin lesions and stress caused by keeping them in small tanks which encourages them to bite and maim each other,” according to WAP. “Behind the scenes, hundreds of sea turtles are crammed into overcrowded shallow tanks out of sight from the tourist view,” said Dr Neil D’Cruze, head of wildlife research and policy at the organisation.

In its latest petition the company outlines the disease, deformities and genetic defects caused by in-breeding, such as being born without eyes.
The CTC has claimed that turtle breeding on the farm is essential due to demand for turtle meat by residents and local restaurants.

“It’s really disappointing that Carnival Cruise Line has failed to provide WAP with any meaningful action to help protect these sea turtles, which is why we’re urging the public to sign a petition,” Dr D’Cruze said.

“Carnival have been aware of the conditions at the farm and of our concerns since we first campaigned against the CTC in 2012. However on a recent call with the cruise line's director of sustainability [Elaine Heldewier], she mentioned that she thought all issues had been addressed, while also confirming that Carnival had never independently verified this,” George White, a spokesman for WAP, told Telegraph Travel.

Officials at Carnival, including the cruise line’s department of sustainability, have yet to respond to Telegraph Travel’s request for a comment on its awareness of the alleged mistreatment of the turtles at the CTC.

“Carnival and many other cruise lines have shore excursions that feature the Cayman Turtle Farm,” a Carnival spokesperson told Telegraph Travel.

“In the short term we would like Carnival to stop sending its passengers to the centre as it is reliant on this tourist footfall. At the centre itself, vital first steps are to stop tourist handling for selfies and the sale of endangered turtle meat to tourists,” Mr White told Telegraph Travel.

“Ultimately we want to see the farm operate as a genuine rehabilitation and education centre, where endangered turtles are properly protected. These wild animals should not be handled by tourists or served up on a tourist plate as a novelty burger,” said Dr D’Cruze.

Telegraph Travel also contacted the CTC and officials from the Cayman Islands government, including the department of environmental health, for a comment on the alleged mistreatment. Responding on behalf of both parties, the Cayman Islands government states: “As affirmation of its animal care standards, the Cayman Turtle Centre is regularly (at least twice per year) inspected by the constitutional authority for animal welfare matters in the Cayman Islands: the Animal Welfare Unit of the Cayman Islands Department of Agriculture.

“These inspections are done by a team comprising two veterinarians and two animal welfare experts,” Stran Bodden, chief officer from the Cayman Islands Ministry of Tourism, told Telegraph Travel.

“While the Ministry will not respond specifically to sensational allegations, we will provide facts that provide a general perspective on the Cayman Turtle Conservation and Education Centre Ltd. (CTC) and its contributions to its core missions of education on and conservation of sea turtles.”

He went on to say: “Grand Cayman houses the only facility in the world that is successfully breeding sea turtles in a self-sustaining closed cycle that takes no animals or eggs from the wild. CTC has decades of experience in offering the public the opportunity to learn about and interact with sea turtles which are not only the iconic species of our national identity, but are also charismatic ambassador animals for our marine environment in general,” Mr Bodden said.

“The millions of dollars plowed into the Cayman Turtle Farm each year could be much better spent on protecting green sea turtles in the wild, using tried and tested methods which have been shown to yield real results," said Marydele Donnelly, the director of international policy for the Sea Turtle Conservancy (STC), who co-authored the report with Dr D’Cruze as well as animal welfare advocate Rachel Alcock.

The STC has actively called for the closure of the Cayman Island turtle farm for many years, criticising it for “failing to meet appropriate humane, conservation and scientific standards,” Ms Donnelly said.

“Because the CTF is one of the most successful tourist attractions in the Cayman Islands, however, the local government has resisted all calls to shut it down, choosing instead to subsidise the operation,” she added.

The CTC has also previously claimed it has released over 31,000 turtles into the wild since 1968, which is “an impressive sounding number, although only 13 have been recorded as returning to nest on Caymanian beaches,” WAP noted in its 2012 report. According to Ms Donnelly the farm is hiding behind its “conservation curtain.”