The ultra-heavy 'therapeutic' blanket designed to make you feel like you're being hugged

Travellers can enjoy a deeper, more restful sleep with a new high-tech weighted blanket designed to reduce stress and anxiety by simulating the sensation of being hugged, its designer claims.

Applying the principles of “deep pressure touch stimulation” therapy, the Gravity blanket is made with "high density plastic poly pellets" designed to relax your nervous system by targeting pressure points on the body linked to improved sleep, mood and relaxation, creating the feeling of being held, similar to how a parent might “swaddle an infant” to sleep.  

The process is said to increase serotonin and melatonin levels while decreasing cortisol levels, which reduces your heart rate and blood pressure, while the minimised body movement from increased relaxation promotes a deeper REM (rapid eye movement) sleep cycle, which is the period when your brain and body are being recharged.

Offered in three weight sizes - 15 lbs (6.8kg), 20 lbs (9kg) and 25 lbs (11.3kg) - the duvet is meant to be between seven and 12 per cent of the user’s weight. With a soft fleece cover and a cotton inner shell, Gravity has been made with durable, washable and breathable materials that keep you from becoming too hot under it.

“The science behind Gravity reveals that it can be used to treat a variety of ailments, including insomnia, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, as well as circumstantial stress and prolonged anxiety,” its Brooklyn-based designer, John Fiorentino, claims on Kickstarter, the crowdfunding website where the design was recently launched.

Previous research has suggested that weighted blankets could have positive effects on sleep. A study in 2015 published in the Journal of Sleep Medicine and Disorders reported that “weighted blankets and vets can provide a beneficial calming effect, especially in clinical disorders” and “may aid in reducing insomnia through altered tactile input”.

Research from 2008 in Occupational Therapy in Mental Health also suggested that the use of weighted blankets was effective for those who suffer from anxiety.

Back in 1992, a study by Temple Grandin PhD found that: “Deep pressure touch has been found to have beneficial effects in a variety of clinical settings. Occupational therapists have observed that a very light touch alerts the nervous system, but deep pressure is relaxing and calming.”

Priced from $169, Gravity is expected to be available for delivery this autumn in September and October.

Gravity isn’t the only bizarre blanket made available for travellers recently. Snuggling up under a duvet could be as easy as putting on a jacket or pair of trousers with "duvet suits" - extra-padded pyjamas - that come with a detachable hood and double up as a pillow squished inside its carry bag. They are three times warmer than a fleece blanket or a jumper, it is claimed.

The Slanket, meanwhile, is a 60" x 95" fleece blanket with sleeves, lets you disappear under a warm cover without sacrificing the mobility of your arms, allowing you to eat, drink, read or use your hands for other tasks while keeping your body warm. It comes in a couple of styles including one with a built-in pocket for your feet to keep your toes toasty and the Double Slanket which has two pairs of sleeves, to keep both you and another person cosy under a shared blanket.