Philippines island paradise 'safe' despite US kidnapping warning, says army

Military officials in the Philippines have moved to reassure holidaymakers that one of the last unspoiled island paradises on earth is safe to visit, despite the US government issuing a warning that terrorist groups are plotting to kidnap foreigners.

The US embassy in Manila on Wednesday said it had “credible information” that terrorists in the Palawan Province, including Puerto Princesa City and the areas surrounding the popular Puerto Princesa Subterranean River National Park, were planning “to conduct kidnapping operations targeting foreign nationals”. It advised its citizens to review their travel and security plans, “avoid large crowds and gatherings and remain vigilant at all times”.

The British Foreign Office (FCO) did not release its own guidance but repeated the American concerns, adding that Britons should “exercise heightened vigilance in these areas”.

However, the Philippine’s Western Command (Wescom) said that the island, which boasts hidden beaches, emerald lagoons and towering limestone cliffs, is safe for visitors.

“We remain on heightened alert but assure the public that Palawan, being one of the most beautiful places in the world, is safe for both local and foreign nationals, resigning in and/or visiting the province, including Puerto Princesa,” a Westcom statement quoted by ABS-CBN News said.

“We see to it that we are always a step further on security.”

Army spokesperson Colonel Edgar Arevalo said local forces had not received any specific intelligence on a threat to the province, but that extra checkpoints had been set up in tourist areas.

Visiting for Telegraph Travel in 2016, Philip Sherwell described Palawan as one of South-East Asia’s final frontiers and “still largely unexplored and unexploited”.

Of El Nido, in northern Palawan, he said: “We arrived with jaws dropped as we soaked up our new surroundings in one of Asia’s most beautiful, least crowded and most sympathetically developed destinations.

“Here, craggy limestone islands rise out of clear waters towards a horizon shimmering in the haze of heat.”

Though the Philippines has suffered from terrorist activity in recent years, the FCO says around 154,000 British nationals visited in 2015 and that most are trouble free.

As well as issuing a fresh alert the US embassy drew visitors’ attention to a Worldwide Caution issued in March, which said armed terrorist and criminal groups operate in the Philippines and may target US citizens for kidnapping.

The FCO says the majority of the Philippines is safe but advises against all travel to the southern Mindanao region and Sulu archipelago on account of terrorist activity and clashes between the military and insurgent groups. It advises against all but essential travel to parts of Mindanao and to the south of Cebu province, due to terrorism.

Last month the US warned its citizens away from the central Visayas region over terrorism fears from the Islamic fundamentalist group Abu Sayyaf, which has pledged allegiance to the Islamic State.

The Foreign Office warns that terrorists are “very likely to try to carry out attacks” in the Philippines and lists several groups capable of operating throughout the country.

Of kidnapping, it says: “There has been an increase in kidnapping of foreign nationals since late 2015, with a number of new cases involving terrorist groups.

“Some hostages, including foreign nationals, have been murdered. It’s likely that terrorist groups continue to plan kidnap operations against western nationals in the region.”