Iconic Ireland: on the trail of literary lights

From Bram Stoker’s Dracula to poetry by WB Yeats, the printed word is a living presence in Ireland, where life, literature and landscape merge.

It was on a recent walk through Dublin that a pub sign set my brain cells fizzing. Davy Byrne’s: wasn’t that something to do with James Joyce? 

At length it came back to me. This had to be the pub in Joyce’s Ulysses where Leopold Bloom adjourns for a restorative glass of burgundy and a Gorgonzola sandwich. Both turned out to be on the menu, so I felt compelled to do likewise. 

To my mind, that’s a fine example of how literature works in Ireland. It seems to spill out from the page and permeate the whole of the island, town and country alike. Storytelling is central to the Irish character and the printed word is a living presence. 

You needn’t follow a formal literary trail or wait for a festival, though there are many worthwhile ones to discover – among them Bloomsday, when hundreds of Joyce enthusiasts act out the events of Ulysses around the streets of Dublin. Simply going for a wander around the corner can uncover any number of connections to Ireland’s written heritage. 

Trinity is arguably the literary heart of Dublin, which is a Unesco City of Literature
Walk around the richly varied buildings of Dublin Castle, for example, and you’re treading in the footsteps of Bram Stoker. The creator of Dracula worked here as a civil servant, having been born in Clontarf, a suburb of Dublin. Just five minutes away is Trinity College, where Stoker graduated in mathematics. Trinity is arguably the literary heart of Dublin, which is a Unesco City of Literature. 

Trinity’s cobbled courts have altered little since Stoker’s day, and the greatest treasure house remains the Old Library. Setting eyes on the original manuscript of The Book of Kells is an experience to set your neck hairs on end; I thought the textual illuminations so bright that they might as well have been inked yesterday. And the echoing Long Room is surely one of the world’s most spectacular reading rooms. At 213ft in length, it more than lives up to its name. 

Marble busts line The Long Room, and by common consent the finest of them is that of Jonathan Swift. The writer and priest lived in Dublin for most of his life, but his influence may also be felt elsewhere on the island of Ireland. 

On a visit to Armagh – a steep town with splendid Georgian buildings – I saw Swift’s very own first edition of Gulliver’s Travels in the Armagh Robinson Library, which is Northern Ireland’s oldest. The cities and rural landscapes of Northern Ireland have delivered inspiration to generations of eminent writers. Lately, some innovative initiatives have made it easy to discover the locations significant to their work. 

In Belfast, you can download an iPhone app in which authors including the late Nobel laureate Seamus Heaney, Paul Muldoon and Derek Mahon provide video guides to the city, interspersed with readings of their own work. 

In the nearby town of Bellaghy stands the Seamus Heaney HomePlace, where you can explore the life and works of the late poet.

CS Lewis was a son of Northern Ireland, and based much of his fantasy land of Narnia on the Mourne Mountains. 

There is a supernatural quality, too, to the County Sligo scenes that enchanted WB Yeats and feature so heavily in his poetry. Glowering over the town of Sligo is Benbulben, a table-top mountain so perfectly chiselled that it scarcely seems the work of nature alone. Drumcliffe Churchyard, underneath the mountain, is the poet’s final resting place – as per the instructions in his last poem, Under Ben Bulben. 

It’s a place of ghostly stillness, as must have been appreciated by the monks who established a monastery here in the sixth century. 

Even without its literary associations, the lough and its thickly wooded shores would warrant a trip
I have spent many hours here and elsewhere in County Sligo, seeking out the places in which Yeats took delight. First on my list was Lough Gill. It’s possible to take a cruise around the uninhabited island made famous by The Lake Isle of Innisfree. 

Even without its literary associations, the lough and its thickly wooded shores would warrant a trip. It’s an example of how places in the north-west of Ireland possess such unspoilt beauty.

The county of Monaghan is one of Ireland’s hidden gems. Landlocked by six counties, it’s an area characterised by small, rounded hills known as drumlins – according to geologists, the pock marks left by retreating glaciers at the close of the last Ice Age. 

Monaghan’s literary voices have tended to be as distinctive as the landscape, and none more so than Patrick Kavanagh. In works such as the novel Tarry Flynn he consistently refused to romanticise the harsh realities of rural life. 

I knew little about the writer until I visited the Patrick Kavanagh Rural and Literary Resource Centre at Inniskeen, the village of his birth. The small whitewashed building turned out to contain an audiovisual theatre, specially commissioned paintings based on his most famous poems and a permanent exhibition that deftly tells the story of his life and work. 

It’s a measure of its success that I’ve since read Kavanagh’s works and would love to return to see Kavanagh Country, an occasional tour which includes stops around the county for anecdotes, poems and a one-man show performed by a local actor. 

But that’s Ireland all over: wherever you wander, you’ll find your ears opened to new voices and your eyes opened to the sublime scenes that enthused them. 