Choose the Caribbean island to suit your priorities

No two Caribbean islands are the same, but which one is most suited to you? Here, you'll be able to discover your ideal destination.

The dozens of scattered islands in the Caribbean have many things in common – beaches as soft as icing sugar, the inviting, clear Caribbean Sea – but they also offer amazing variety.

These islands may be idyllic, but no two are the same. Barbados marries a laid-back lifestyle with a distinct British flavour and grand, old sugar plantations.

In turn, lush Grenada is known as the “Spice Island”, thanks to its plantations of nutmeg, cinnamon and ginger.

The great thing about all of them is they are so easy to reach, with direct British Airways flights and flight times of around eight or nine hours.

Why not experience Barbados’ unique charm for yourself? On the west coast the calm waters are perfect for swimming and there is no shortage of wonderful alfresco eateries, happening bars and luxury resorts.

You won’t be short of beaches in Antigua – there is one for every day of year
Elegant Hotels has six beachfront properties on the island, from its newest chic wellness retreat Waves Hotel & Spa, with its watersports, yoga and pilates classes, and freshly prepared food, to the all-suite Turtle Beach with its three pools, kids’ club and tennis courts.

What’s more, all the resorts are all-inclusive and you can travel between them to experience the variety Elegant Hotels offers. With daily British Airways flights from London Gatwick, it is a great choice for both couples and families.

The soaring Pitons of St Lucia are unmistakable. This is a lush island where fertile valleys, rainforests, mountains and banana plantations all try to distract from the beautiful hidden coves and sweeping bays. With daily direct British Airways flights from London Gatwick, it is another favourite with holidaymakers.

The diversity of the St Lucian landscape is more than matched by the amazing hotels to be found on the island. Do you want to combine Caribbean luxury with a health and wellbeing resort?

BodyHoliday promises: “Give us your body for a week and we’ll give you back your mind.” You will enjoy complimentary daily spa treatments, as well as a huge array of fitness classes and both land and water sports.

In contrast, Rendezvous is a relaxed, adults-only retreat, where the focus is on spending quality time together in an amazing setting.

Situated on a two-mile stretch of sandy beach and with just 100 rooms, it is an intimate resort with two pools, a lazy river and a spa.

Meanwhile in Antigua, you won’t be short of beaches – there is one for every day of year. You will also find towns of pretty-coloured buildings, imposing 18th-century forts and Nelson’s Dockyard, where the British hero of Trafalgar was once stationed. And with up to seven direct British Airways flights a week from London Gatwick, it is easy to reach.

Elite Island Resorts has four amazing retreats on the island, from St James’s Club & Villas, known as Antigua’s most famous address and set on its own 100-acre peninsula, to the all-suite The Verandah Resort & Spa, which is perfect for families and offers two beaches, a huge pool and 18-hole mini golf.

Couples will enjoy the Pineapple Beach Club, an adults-only resort set on beautiful Long Bay beach, while Galley Bay Resort & Spa is another adults-only hideaway specialising in relaxed luxury with private cottages and romantic restaurants set right on the beach.

Made up of 700 islands, the Bahamas is a dreamy, romantic destination
Barefoot luxury is the ethos behind the One&Only Bahamas. An exclusive island retreat with a glamorous past and beloved by celebrities, the resort gives you a feeling of staying on a private estate.

Made up of 700 islands, the Bahamas is a dreamy, romantic destination. At One&Only Bahamas, on Paradise Island, you can dine at a restaurant where Michelin-starred chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten looks after the menu, play on one of the best 18-hole golf courses in the Caribbean or relax in the gardens inspired by the Palace of Versailles. British Airways operates direct flights to the Bahamas from London Heathrow four times a week.

One of the Caribbean’s best-kept secrets is verdant Grenada, within easy reach of the UK thanks to a direct twice-weekly British Airways flight from London Gatwick that touches down in St Lucia en route.

Hike the rainforest trails, pick up local spices in the charming capital St George’s, visit The Grenada Chocolate Company or simply relax on one of its 45 glorious beaches.

Grand Anse Beach is the island’s most famous and the Radisson Grenada is set right on its sands. A favourite with both families and couples, it offers water sports from windsurfing to stand-up paddle boarding and scuba diving, as well as relaxing alternatives such as its spa and 300ft freeform swimming pool, complete with waterfalls and swim-up bar.

But of course, the Caribbean isn’t all English-speaking. Why not enjoy the warmth of the Latin Caribbean and explore the 1,000 miles of beaches, rainforests and mountains of the Dominican Republic?

The beautiful island is also home to the boutique luxury of Zoëtry Agua Punta Cana, an exquisite wellness resort where you can stay in cane-thatched suites, bathe in complimentary Bulgari toiletries and enjoy gourmet dining. It is all part of the Endless Privileges® experience.

Why stop at Punta Cana? Zoëtry Wellness & Spa resorts can also been found on the Caribbean coast of Mexico, in Cancun and the Riviera Maya.

Zoëtry Villa Rolandi is set on Isla Mujeres, a beautiful island that can be reached in a 25-minute sailing on the resort’s private yacht. An intimate resort with just 35 ocean-front suites and a truly personalised service, it also offers a Thalasso Spa and an amazing array of water sports.

Or head further south in a private chauffeured transfer to the pristine beaches of the Riviera Maya. Zoëtry Paraiso de la Bonita is set in 14 lush acres of a protected national park right on the coast, with 90 luxuriously spacious suites, a Padi dive school and the world’s second-largest coral reef just off-shore.

The diversity of the St Lucian landscape is more than matched by the amazing hotels to be found on the island
The Zoëtry experience is closer than you think as well. British Airways flies direct to both Punta Cana and Cancun up to three times a week from London Gatwick.

Whichever Caribbean island you choose, you’re sure to have the perfect holiday.

Meanwhile, further afield, plopped in the mid-Atlantic, Bermuda offers its own unique charm, thanks to its pink-sand beaches, pretty pastel buildings, wonderful golf courses and hint of British colonial heritage.

The Hamilton Princess & Beach Club overlooks beautiful Hamilton Harbour and has its own 60-berth marina. The official host hotel for the 2017 Americas Cup, the ultra-stylish resort manages to combine a city location with an exclusive beach club, the only celebrity chef-run restaurant on the island and a huge, state-of-the-art spa. You can fly to Bermuda up to seven times a week direct from London Gatwick with British Airways as well.

When you book a holiday with British Airways Holidays you have the peace of mind of knowing it is ATOL-protected; you can reserve your holiday with a deposit, and a 24-hour holiday helpline is provided in case you need it.

Book your Caribbean break
With sun-drenched beaches and activities to suit all ages and budgets, the Caribbean is unbeatable as an all-inclusive holiday destination. 

Whether you are looking for a relaxing break or family fun, British Airways takes care of every detail, with a great choice of carefully selected hotels and resorts. 

For more information or to book your holiday, please visit ba.com/caribbean or call 0344 493 0120.