When flyers end up in the wrong cities

And whom to blame

WHEN Gulliver’s fiancée was growing up in Jeffersonville, Indiana, her uncle came for a visit. But as his flight landed in Louisville, just across the Ohio River from Jeffersonville, he was fast asleep. And he remained in that state as the plane took off again. It was not until an hour later that he sheepishly called his relatives to inform them that he was 100 miles away in Cincinnati.

Was that the airline’s fault? Perhaps the flight attendants should have done a more forceful job of making sure every passenger, conscious or not, was aware of his arrival in Louisville. But one can hardly blame the airline more than one would a train conductor for a passenger’s missed stop.

Earlier this year, a Dutch teenager in search of adventure before starting college booked a flight to Sydney. On his layover in Toronto, he thought that the plane he was boarding seemed awfully small to take him 10,000 miles to Australia. But the flight was designated as Sydney-bound, so he got on board. It was only after takeoff, when he looked at the map and saw the plane going east instead of west, that he realised something was wrong. Soon he landed in Sydney, Nova Scotia. He didn’t stay long, given that a blizzard was on its way and he’d packed beach clothes.
Who was to blame? Given that an American woman on the same flight apparently also thought she was headed Down Under, the ticket-seller clearly had not done a great job of noting the distinction. But really it is also incumbent on the flyer to make sure he is bound, say, for Monterrey, Mexico and not Monterey, California.

But in the case of a recent dispute between a French woman and United Airlines, it is hard not to put all of the blame on the airline. Unlike our unfortunate Dutch friend, she had a ticket booked between the right two airports, Newark and Paris. She found the gate listed on her boarding pass and entered the plane. Oddly, someone was sitting in her seat, but a flight attendant directed her to a free one, and she strapped in and took off.

Six hours later, she landed in San Francisco.

It turned out that United had announced a gate change back in Newark, but the woman, who spoke no English, did not understand and had no reason to think it applied to her. Here was the first mistake by United: critical announcements such as these should really be made in the languages of the origin and destination countries.

But bigger lapses were to come. United allowed a passenger to board the wrong flight. Either the gate agent did not scan her boarding pass or the scanner rejected it and she was allowed on anyway. (As Gary Leff pointed out on his View From the Wing blog, American airlines do not typically re-check boarding passes at the aeroplane door, while those in many other countries do.) And when she told crew that someone was in her seat, the flight attendant should have checked her boarding pass and noticed that she was on the wrong plane.
The passenger’s family is most concerned about the safety implications of United’s oversights. “My aunt could have been anyone,” her English-speaking niece told ABC7. “She could have been a terrorist and killed people on that flight and they didn't know.” But that is not likely. After all, she had already made it through security, and airlines do not deter terrorism by making sure everyone is on the right plane.
The far bigger issue is simply the realisation of every flyer’s nightmare of ending up in the wrong city. When the flight crew announces over the plane’s PA, “If Chicago is not your destination, please see a member of the crew,” most of us laugh it off, assuming that there are enough checks to prevent that from occurring. As these anecdotes remind us, there are not.

United settled a suit with the French passenger, admitted fault, and apologised. But the airline must take steps to ensure this does not happen in the future. Maybe, two weeks after United announced ten policy changes following a horrific incident in which a passenger was dragged off one of its flights, it ought to add a couple of new ones to the list. 