Blood, fire and mayhem: the art of Britain’s conflicts with Spain

Sabre-rattling Brexiters should look at the paintings that depict the barbaric wars between the two European nations

One unlikely beneficiary of the rapid descent from triggering article 50 to sabre-rattling over Gibraltar is the City of London’s Guildhall art gallery, whose largest and strangest painting suddenly looks relevant again after more than 200 years. John Singleton Copley’s The Defeat of the Floating Batteries at Gibraltar is so vast, at nearly eight metres wide, that a special space had to be designed to accommodate it, yet as recently as five days ago it was as obscure as it was colossal. After all, it shows a forgotten moment in a forgotten war against a nation we have not fought for centuries.

In this giant “history painting”, which took nearly 10 years to create, Copley shows the foiling of a foul Spanish plot. With Britain distracted by the American revolutionary war, Spain made an opportunistic attempt to reconquer Gibraltar in 1782 using the ingenious novelty of floating gun batteries to bombard the Rock. The painting shows the floating platforms sinking in flames after the British battered them with superheated cannon shot. It is a horrific scene, with Spanish soldiers jumping in the sea and the magnanimous British commander, George August Eliott, ordering their rescue.

Can we really be heading back there? Could Gibraltar once again become the scene of blood, fire and mayhem that Copley painted? Bizarre as this unanticipated consequence of Brexit seems, there is plenty of evidence in British art of the potential for savage conflict in our relationship with Spain.

In 1796, a few years after Copley unveiled his Gilbraltar epic, Philippe-Jacques de Loutherbourg painted Spanish sailors and soldiers meeting their deaths in his fiery vision Defeat of the Spanish Armada. Loutherbourg, who was the designer at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane and created son et lumière spectacles that anticipated cinema, glories in the smoke, heat and blazing reds and yellows of Britain’s most celebrated victory over Spain. The failure of Phillip II’s armada had taken place more than 200 years earlier, in 1588. Soon after it happened, it was recorded in the Armada Portrait of Queen Elizabeth I, which shows the sea battle in the distance behind the jewel-bedecked Elizabeth, whose heroic sea captains took credit for a battle determined in truth by the weather. But the battle was still a symbol of national glory in the 18th century because Spain was still an enemy. It is sometimes forgotten that Nelson demolished the fleets of Spain as well as France at the Battle of Tralfalgar in 1805. A 19th-century Spanish painting by Francisco Sans Cabot in the Prado museum in Madrid shows desperate Spanish survivors of Trafalgar making it on to a stormy shore.

The enmity between Britain and Spain was a fatal mix of geopolitics and religion. Yes, we were rivals for control of the Atlantic, but Spain, as the most powerful Catholic nation in the world, also felt an obligation to bring Protestant Britain back into the Pope’s orbit. The British, for their part, concocted paranoid visions of Inquisition torture: visitors to the Tower of London used to be shown instruments supposedly recovered from armada ships and intended for forcibly converting Protestant Brits.

So deep was this enmity, so unrelenting the wars it caused, that it became an image of the horror of all war. In 1629, the artist Peter Paul Rubens, who as well as being the most famous painter of his time was also a courtier and diplomat, was sent by Spain to negotiate a peace deal with Britain. He used a unique method of persuasion. To show Charles I why the fruits of peace are better than the horrors of war, he painted Peace and War, in which Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, holds back Mars, the god of war. Mars looks with dark longing at the children who would be war’s most innocent victims. They are kept safe and fed on the grapes that grow in peacetime. The painting is a plea for an end to Spain’s long wars with Britain. Unfortunately, they carried on, the two powers fighting everywhere from the Caribbean to Gibraltar.

This long history of hostility ended with a struggle that inspired the most powerful of all artistic denunciations of war. The Spanish peninsular war began when Napoleon, having been an ally of Spain, tried to take control of the country. Spanish rebels rose against France in scenes of extreme brutality on both sides. This conflict, the first modern guerrilla war, was recorded by the great Spanish artist Francisco Goya in his painting The Third of May and his terrifying prints The Disasters of War.

For once, Britain became Spain’s ally when it sent an army to fight Napoleon in Spain. Among all his revelations of war’s horrors, Goya portrayed the Duke of Wellington twice, close up and on horseback. An enigmatic, chilly Englishman looks out at us from Goya’s portrait of Spain’s unlikely military saviour. His eyes have seen all the barbarity that Brexiters seem to think would be jolly good to revive.