Sex and the city: how raunch culture is reshaping architecture

We all know that sex sells, but has urban design gone too far in mimicking porn?

Are designers sexist and lazy? Do they pander to easy stereotypes? Since the mid-90s the pervasiveness of raunch culture that has seen porn chic infiltrate cosmetics and fashion industries hasn't spared the built environment. The advertising and product displays in shopping malls and on billboards regularly feature young women in sexual postures: head thrown back, mouth open and orgasmic expression. Beyond ads for Calvin Klein underwear and Playboy lingerie, "hot feminism" has also been co-opted by architects and developers.

Pamela Anderson pouts seductively from the Sam Newman house in St Kilda West, declaring it as a lad's manor. SJB's Esplanade apartments in St Kilda use fishnet stockings as a motif that alludes to the gritty suburb's demi-monde. Meanwhile, Beyonce, wrapped in fabric and writhing in her Ghost video, inspires the proposed form of Elenberg Fraser's curvaceous Premier apartment tower at the corner of Bourke and Spencer streets.  

"In public urban space we see this mimicking of pornography and strip-club culture," says Dr Nicole Kalms, author of the new book Hypersexual City: The Provocation of Soft-Core Urbanism, which discusses the prevalence of provocative imagery, how designers use sex to sell, the context in which the imagery is used and how the city changes as a result. 

"Architects need to have a hook and they need to be like advertisers – ever more provocative in the work they do," Kalms says. "Sex is always going to sell. But there needs to be more depth around what it means to use women's bodies as objects for architecture."

It's not just the disciplines of communication design and architecture that adopt easy stereotypes regarding women. Industrial design also slips into gender formulas. From wrist watches to razor blades, female products tend to be soft, curvaceous and, most identifiably, petite and pink. 

"Shrink it and pink it, we call it," says Dr Judith Glover, who lectures in the design units "Sex Sells" and "Masculinity" at RMIT. "We don't check our role as designers and how we portray gender and the messages we continually put into objects and send out," she says. "We're part of the cycle of creating messaging symbols unquestioningly."

Businesses ignore these gender sensitivities at their peril. When Dell computers targeted women with a pink laptop offering bonus recipes online, the backlash was swift. The Della computer was reportedly pulled after just two weeks.  

"It's not that the expression of sexuality is bad, but it's just a narrow expression that we see in urban spaces," Kalms says. Away from petite and pink, porno-chic images depict a narrow demographic: about 75 per cent of female models are estimated to be aged between 

Unlike advertising or product design, architecture has greater longevity and arguably more responsibility to take its use of sexuality seriously. 

Architecture needs to "transcend the skimming of pop-cultural iconography as a tactic to merely play or provoke," Kalms writes. "How can architecture and urbanism develop a language that is able to engage with the rapid changes in sexual politics and equally with the important work of gender activism?"

Navigating this terrain can be fraught. What is ironic to some people might be threatening and offensive to others. Perhaps it depends on who says it, and who it's directed at. Would the "laddishness" of the Pamela Anderson house have been less kindly received had it been designed by a male architect, instead of Cassandra Fahey? Either way, some residents thought the image advertised the building as a brothel. 

Meanwhile, when SJB Architects position the street sex worker as a contextual "neighbour" in the fishnet facade of its Esplanade apartments ("the fishnet stockings simultaneously speaks of sex, the seaside and the politics of the promenade", SJB's Michael Bialek has said) it prompts the normalisation of prostituted women, Kalms writes. The fishnet facade "trivialises and 'normalises' a trade that is fraught with violence and exploitation", she contends. 

Arguably, the fishnet imagery is too subtle to be noticed. Similarly, the Beyonce building might be a welcome feminine antidote to the hoary cliche of the phallic skyscraper.

Nevertheless the ramifications of more explicit stereotypes are real, Kalms says. They can generate no-go zones in a city. Rather than finding the repetitive exposure to the strip club aesthetic "harmless fun", some women don't feel safe in urban streets they feel are dominated by men. 

It's not about wowserism. Both Kalms and Glover believe there is a need to reflect diverse gender images and avoid reflecting narrow stereotypical norms. "When we make cities more diverse, we make them better for women, we make them better for men, too. There are benefits for all of us."