Is this the end of wine o'clock?

At first glance, it was a normal Saturday night at our local pub. We moaned about work, shared packets of Tyrrells and managed to squish 12 chairs around a six-person table. Intermittently, we’d take it in turns to buy rounds. But when it was my turn, I realised something had changed. Something big. Not one woman present was drinking wine.

Instead, the table was covered with vodka cocktails, G&Ts, a lemonade that someone was sheepishly pretending was a G&T, a negroni and a pint of cider. Those evenings when you’d simply head to the bar and order two bottles of sauvignon blanc on autopilot were long past.

Now, orders were so varied that I needed to jot them down on my iPhone Notes. So why are we calling time on wine o’clock? 

It turns out many women just can’t face its high alcohol content any more. Confessions came thick and fast from around the table, detailing misdemeanours committed while under the influence of a few too many glasses of white. ‘I stay off the loopy juice now unless it’s with a meal,’ said one friend.

‘The tipping point was when I got so hammered and embarrassing at a work party in London that, in their desperation to get rid of me, my colleagues spent £180 on a taxi to send me all the way home to Buckinghamshire.’

Another friend, a demure mother of two, admitted that the last time she drank wine was at a party. ‘I threw bottles off a balcony and had to be carried out of the door – sideways, kicking and screaming – by four men.’ And then there are the hangovers. 

My own wine-drinking career ended abruptly last year when a supposedly quiet Friday night in the pub somehow translated into a Saturday morning spent hugging the toilet, when I should have been taking my eight-year-old daughter to gymnastics.

Oh, the shame of being comforted by your wide-eyed, non-judgmental young children – ‘Poor Mummy, she’s got a tummy bug’ – when it’s entirely self-inflicted.

These days, on the rare occasions we do share a bottle, it’ll be prosecco: it feels celebratory, it comes in smaller glasses, and it has a lower alcohol content than flat wines (10 or 11 per cent compared with 13 or 14). We’ll have it as an aperitif, before moving on to safer drinks.

And it’s not just my group of friends: Brits are drinking less generally, with HMRC figures showing total alcohol consumption per head fell by 18 per cent between 2004 and 2013. And while wine is currently still the favourite alcoholic drink of UK adults (60 per cent would choose it over anything else, according to the Wine and Spirit Trade Association), imports are predicted to drop by 3.5 million cases by 2020. 

Meanwhile, pubs and bars have upped their game with extensive ranges of craft beers, ciders that aren’t Strongbow and non-sickly cocktails. As one friend notes, ‘In the ’90s you could only get horrible, naff things like Sex on the Beach in a goldfish bowl, so it’s no surprise we all drank wine instead.’ 

And then there’s the ‘ginaissance’. The drink that was once associated with 1970s suburban mums is now a hipster favourite. Artisan brands, distilleries and gin festivals are ubiquitous.

A gin hotel, The Distillery, even opened in Notting Hill, London, in January (there’s a choice of 100 varieties on the menu), and, after a 13-year absence, the spirit has been reintroduced, by the Office for National Statistics, to its average- shopping-basket measure of inflation levels. Waitrose reports a 16 per cent increase in gin sales in the last year.

‘One of the big drivers of women drinking less wine is the interest in health, the rise of clean eating and, in particular, the war on sugar,’ explains Sophie Maxwell, futures director at Pearlfisher, a branding agency that advises drinks companies.

‘Wine has been toppled by what are considered to be “cleaner” options, such as gin or vodka. It taps into this idea of healthy hedonism: you can be mindful of your health while drinking spirits mixed with exciting, wholesome-sounding ingredients such as lemongrass, toasted fennel and Sichuan peppercorns.’ 

But ask a medical professional and they’ll tell you that alcohol is alcohol. ‘It’s great if you want to ditch wine but be careful with what you’re swapping it for. Don’t be fooled into thinking spirits are better for your health – they’re not,’ says GP Dr Zoe Neill. 

There are upsides, though. ‘When you compare a large glass of wine at three units with a bottle of beer at 1.4 and a shot of vodka at one, it’s no surprise women get very drunk on wine. Especially when you’re sharing bottles and not keeping track of top-ups,’ explains Nicky Vernede, an NHS dietitian. 

One of the issues with wine is that it’s easy to drink to excess, points out Drinkaware’s Dr Sarah Jarvis. ‘Women underestimate the amount they drink, with many assuming that one glass is one unit of alcohol. But those 250ml pub glasses hold three units – drink just two of these and that’s defined as binge drinking. Remember that you shouldn’t drink more than 14 units per week, and try not to get involved in rounds, because you tend to drink more.’

One of the big drivers of women drinking less wine is the interest in health and the war on sugar
A phrase I kept hearing from the women I spoke to was ‘white-wine witch’. This friend’s experience is typical: ‘It’s white wine in particular that sends me over the edge. I argue with my husband, behave embarrassingly in public, have memory loss and get the worst hangovers. Other drinks just don’t ruin me in the same way.’ 

There are theories that sugar levels or certain sulphites (preservatives) in white wine are to blame, but there isn’t an official explanation. ‘There’s no scientific evidence to suggest that white wine creates worse hangovers than other drinks. I think the issue is that we find white wine easy to quaff quickly, compared to, say, red wine, which we tend to savour,’ says Vernede. 

Wine drinking took off in the 1980s when the bar scene erupted, but it wasn’t until the ’90s that women really went for it. ‘Suddenly wine was everywhere,’ says Helen McGinn, author of Teetotal Tipples and The Knackered Mother’s Wine Club, who worked as a supermarket wine buyer in the mid-1990s. 

‘It was at that point it went from being a weekend treat to an everyday item,’ she says. ‘New World wines from Australia, New Zealand, South America and South Africa began to hit the shelves and they felt so exciting and full of flavour. They were also stronger because grapes grown in warmer countries have a higher alcohol content.’ 

It seeped into popular culture, too: by 2002, the era-defining TV show Friends was sponsored by Jacob’s Creek, whose pre-credits ad showed a gang of pals settling down, with a bottle, to watch.

We saw aspirational dinner parties in This Life and Cold Feet, at which characters flirted, argued and supped wine from enormous glasses. And then there was Bridget Jones. In Helen Fielding’s book Bridget Jones’s Diary (first published in 1996, with the film following in 2001), the heroine was rarely without a glass of chardonnay in hand. 

Millennial women don’t want to get blotto drinking vats of wine in the pub, because it reminds them of their mothers
Yet today a generational shift has occurred – millennial women don’t want to get blotto drinking vats of wine in the pub, because it reminds them of their mothers. They’ll experiment with 1990s fashion but draw the line at 1990s drinking habits. ‘We’re moving away from that derogatory view of women and wine: girls sitting around chugging bucketloads of “lady petrol”,’ says Maxwell. 

It’s not just gin that’s taking its place. There has also been a rise in the popularity of vermouth, the aromatised fortified wine that works like a lower-alcohol spirit (drink over ice with a slice of orange, or with soda water). And Maxwell also points to rum. ‘It hasn’t yet been premium-ised, and with both light and dark rums, it has versatility.’ 

But don’t throw out your wine glasses just yet. McGinn points out that wine producers are starting to respond to consumer demands for wines with less knockout power. ‘A lot of people are looking for lighter wines with lower ABVs – ones you don’t need a knife and fork for; ones that you won’t regret drinking the next day. So producers are starting to rein it in.’ We’ll raise a glass – a small one, mind – to that. Cheers!  