10 of the strangest burgers that money can buy

Capitalising on our collective obsession with chocolate spread, McDonald's have added the Nutella burger to its menu in Italy.

Despite being dubbed a burger, the 'Sweety con Nutella' doesn't actually contain any meat and instead sandwiches the famous chocolate-hazlenut spread between two sweet buns.

While the burger might be a little unorthodox – online opinion is split on whether it actually counts as a burger – the 'Sweety con Nutella' is far from the most bizarre burger out there...

Spaghetti burger

Before their closure, the chefs over at PYT in Philadelphia made a name for themselves creating wacky burgers on a weekly basis, like the Italian-inspired spaghetti burger.

Made from spaghetti noodles constructed into a bunlike form and a mozzarella-stuffed meatball patty, garnished with red sauce and Parmesan flakes, the geniuses at PYT were even kind enough to release the recipe for this sure-to-be-messy burger to the public.

Sushi burger

These days sushi is much more than just a quick lunchtime dash to Itsu, as people find new and increasingly creative ways to consume the Japanese dish - including turning it into a burger.

Instagram is brimming with artsy shots of people showing off their creations, often including traditional sushi components such raw fish, ginger, seaweed and wasabi, but with a burger shop twist. Some versions include pulled pork and pickles, while others packed with a big, juicy burger patty.

Lasagna-Bun burger

Another Italian-inspired dish by PYT, the 'Lasagna-Bun burger' was made by using two thick slices of deep-fried mozzarella and ricotto lasagna as the bun to hold the meatball beef patty.

It was topped with provolone and homemade marinara and served with Italian-Parm fries.

The Alphabet Sandwich

The burger to beat all burgers, the Alphabet Sandwich is exactly what it sounds like. From A (avocado) to Z (zucchini), this gargantuan tower contains 26 toppings, each one starting with a different letter of the alphabet.

Avocado bun burger

As much as we might try to deny it, it's clear the avocado is here to stay. Alongside the five-course avocado pop-up in London and the avocado spread - intended to replace butter or margarine - we also welcomed the avocado bun burger into our lives this summer.

Simply skin and halve your avocado, slip your patty in the middle, and you've got yourself a meal that's guaranteed to bring in the Instagram likes.

Brain burger

This may look like your average burger, but it's hiding a dark secret: it's made from deep fried veal brain, topped with gribiche, a tangy caper-laden dressing, all stuffed into a potato and onion roll.

According to Telegraph food writer, Xanthe Clay, it actually tastes pretty good: "It is delicious. The chewy bun (made by St John Bakery) is just the right texture for the silky brain and piquant capers, topped with a layer of sliced cabbage. It is indeed a good thing, in every sense."

The Cinnaburger

Thank Nick Chipman from Dude Foods for this sickeningly sweet burger. In a blog post, he wrote: "One day a couple months ago they were talking about how great a burger with a Cinnabon as a bun would be. I don’t even remember the context of the rest of their conversation, or why they were even talking about it, but I remember thinking what an amazing idea it was.

"...I decided to grab a Cinnabon to go and make this dream a reality. Once I was back at home I grilled myself a nice half pound burger and fried some bacon. You know, because this burger wasn’t already going to be unhealthy enough as it is. All that was left to do after that was slice my Cinnabon in half and assemble my burger."

A heart attack waiting to happen? Undoubtedly.

The Ice Cream burger

To celebrate National Burger Day, ice cream manufacturers Jude's decided to gift the world their ice cream burger - brown butter pecan ice cream sandwiched between a toasted brioche bun.

Burger-flavoured ice cream

That's right, burger-flavoured ice cream. To mark National Burger day on Aug 27 2013, Sorbitium Ices created an innovative barbecue burger-flavoured ice cream.

Strawberry sauce was substituted for tomato ketchup and instead of sprinkles, guests at the burger event in Dalston Yard enjoyed toppings of candied bacon and dill gherkin ripple.

Cheeseburger in a Can

Why anyone would ever want to eat a cheeseburger that comes from a can when restaurants like McDonald's and Burger King are on practically every corner is beyond us. 

According to a few brave souls on the internet who have tried it, the burger tastes and looks just as bad as you'd imagine.

