Straight Up: Ralph's Coffee & Bar 

If the mark of the world’s best bars is that they spirit you away from the quotidian into a glamorous parallel universe, where everything as reassuringly fine and dandy as a Cole Porter song, then Ralph’s Coffee & Bar is a serious contender.

Stepping over the threshold of 173 Regent Street into the intimate dark wood-panelled saloon feels nothing short of a Mr Benn “as if by magic” escape - so distinct is this decorous bolthole from the clamour of the West End outside, it’s almost like teleportation. Two dapper white-jacketed bartenders authoritatively man the gleaming brass-topped bar to a soundtrack of Ella Fitzgerald and other jazz greats, always the perfect accompaniment to the clinking of ice cubes on glass.

Ralph Lauren sure knows how to deliver an clubby uptown world, as fellow customers are only too aware. This isn’t a bar that people stumble blithely into, it’s a world-class destination for those who already court the equestrian-themed brand; whether that be a glam group of Middle Eastern ladies in furs, a stylish octogenarian American couple, or a pair of chic Italian men who could be paid extras in their polo shirts, chinos and loafers - sockless, natch.

Whether the glowing flanks of thoroughbred horses, leather saddlery and white-trousered men hurling mallets around gets you excited or not is irrelevant - the appeal of Ralph’s Coffee and Bar is that it delivers that old school, five-star hotel bar level of service with such finesse it feels like it’s existed forever. Cocktails are equally refined. Ralph’s Winter Punch, a blend of Somerset brandy, quince liqueur, maple syrup and citrus offers a warming, weighty kick of brandy followed by a lighter lift of lemon.

If Whisky Sours are more your poison then the Ralph Street Sour is a fine - albeit slightly sweeter - substitute combining Fords Gin, Cointreau, pomegranate, lemon and egg white. Be warned though, it comes garnished with three pink hearts in the frothy top. You can also play it safe: the likes of a Margarita, Gimlet and Old Fashioned are listed. Otherwise channel the affluent New Yorker and order off-menu - the staff positively expect it.

Bar snacks are equally moreish - the signature deep-fried olives are reason to return alone. If you’re looking to dine, perhaps pre-theatre, the tuna tartare stacked high and drizzled with with avocado and soy dressing has to be one of the best in town and one imagines Ralph’s Brownie might also steal the show.

The only drawback is the opening hours. This is strictly a daytime and early evening affair with closing time a sensible 8pm - but somehow that just makes it all the more civilised. If you're looking for a restorative sojourn mid-shop the coffee gets heavy billing - “custom blend roasted specifically for Ralph Lauren” - but it has such a clandestine air it really excels as the perfect rendezvous for an after-work/pre-dinner cocktail... or three.