How to be healthy at work: the most nutritious lunches on the high street 

Pret a Manger has recently announced a surge in profits, thanks, in part, to the popularity of its vegetarian food and healthy breakfast, including coconut porridge. With more people opting to buy lunch out daily and greater awareness of healthy eating, it seems that consumers are increasingly concerned about choosing nutritious, balanced foods for their midday meal. 

Chain outlets and supermarkets offer a huge variety of lunchtime options, from sushi to salads to soups,  all claiming to be "healthy" choices for the hungry office worker. With the staggering number of options available (and the ever present, tempting range of snacks on display) it can be a struggle to determine which dish really will provide the best balance of protein, carbohydrates, fruit and vegetables, without sneaking in unexpected quantities of sugar and salt.

In order to find the best options available on the high street, we spoke to nutritionist and dietician Jo Travers, who has picked the healthiest choices from the menu.

Pret A Manger: Chicken & broccoli brown rice soup

This warming soup contains slow-release carbs, protein and vegetables, so all the food groups are represented.

LEON: Original super salad 

Loads of fibre (most people are about 12g short of  fibre every day and this lunch gives you 8g), protein from the cheese and slow-release carbs from the quinoa. There are plenty of good fats from the avocados and seeds in this salad, too.

Sainsburys: My Goodness! Persian Chicken Salad 

This is the best of a pretty bad lot really. It’s still pretty high in sugar but it’s pretty well balanced in terms of the food groups. It’s got lots of whole grains which is good for fibre and slow-release carbs.

Tesco: Falafel, red pepper and tabbouleh salad 

Good slow-release carbs and lots of veg in this, plus protein from the chickpeas in the falafel. 

Itsu: Garden shed ‘on a bed’ 

Itsu's meals are often a bit low on vegetables but this one has a great variety, including avocado, a source of healthy fat. There’s also rice for carbs and egg for protein. This should keep you going all afternoon.

EAT: Houmous and falafel mezze salad

Plenty of veg and plant proteins with some good, slow-release carbs. You'll get over half your daily fibre needs in this salad.

Starbucks: Pulled beef chilli and rice

Not a great deal of choice in Starbucks as it mainly offers sandwiches which are low in vegetables. This pulled beef has beans, sweetcorn and peppers so it’s the best choice for veg, but it also has lean protein from the beef (which is also good for iron), and rice for carbs.

Greggs: Mexican chicken, smoky rice and bean salad 

Everything in Greggs is pretty low in vegetables but this option is the best of the bunch. It’s got just the right amount of protein and carbs to keep you going.

Boots: Tuna, grilled peppers & pea sandwich 

As with all sandwiches, there is never enough vegetables so I would always add a salad or at least a piece of fruit to this. However it’s got plenty of fibre from the seeded bread and peas, and lean protein from the tuna. The tuna is pole-caught, too, so better for fish stocks.