Beloved Burrata Finds a Springtime Match

Fresh Italian cheeses, such as mozzarella di bufala, fior di latte and ricotta, are best eaten as soon as they are made, when they taste utterly pure, sweet and milky. Or at least that’s the wished for, if seldom experienced, ideal.
In a village in southern Italy, I visited a family-run cheese shop. Every morning, a variety of fresh cheeses are produced on site, mainly mozzarella in all sizes and shapes, and burrata, mozzarella’s luscious creamy-centered cousin. All of the cheeses are displayed in a pristine stainless-steel basin, bobbing in a light brine, when the store opens for business at 10 a.m. By noon, all of the cheese is sold, and the shop closes. That is the epitome of freshness.
Burrata, a once relatively unknown regional specialty, has gained immensely in popularity outside Italy. Now, twice-weekly shipments from Puglia meet the needs of consumers in the United States. That is a lot of burrata. There is also excellent domestically produced burrata, from California, New York, Texas, Vermont and Wisconsin.
Everyone loves it — and why not? The filling, a mixture of fresh heavy cream and cheese curd, is spooned onto a quivering, thinly stretched layer of mozzarella and wrapped into a bundle. My mouth waters just thinking about it. Burrata is an affordable temptation, all the more valuable for its delicate, fleeting beauty. It demands to be devoured.
The truth is, these cheeses have a short shelf life, two or three days, before they begin to sour, so it’s worth asking your “provider” when shipments arrive and checking dates for the freshest possible specimens.
Fresh burrata needs no adornment, just good bread, or perhaps a drizzle of olive oil and few arugula leaves.
To make it more festive, you can add a quickly made topping of seasonal vegetables, and serve the gilded burrata as a salad or an antipasto. Bright-green fava beans, celery and fennel make a striking rendition for spring, flecked with mint or basil. I wowed my guests when I served this recently.
Consider other pairings throughout the year: slices of grilled eggplant or roasted red and yellow peppers, daubed with basil pesto; a salad of heirloom tomatoes; chanterelle mushrooms sautéed with rosemary and garlic; grilled radicchio.
Good with drinks or as an impromptu meal, burrata, with your accompaniment of choice, makes for easy entertaining.