Webbe's at Jerwood Gallery, Hastings, restaurant review: welcome to the un-Boden seaside

I live in St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex – the Hove to Hastings’s Brighton, if you will. The physical demarcation remains Hastings Pier (Pier of the Year 2017, no less): westward lies St Leo-Ho; eastwards, Stings – and five miles up the road is the market town of Battle, where some sort of historical skirmish took place 951 years ago, though who’s counting? 

Anyway, to the far east lies Hastings Old Town, beloved of the hipster DFLs and AFBs (Down From London/Along From Brighton) and the place where Jamie O once shot such an unashamedly aspirational and bunting-tastic summer Sainsbury’s ad in the picturesque street Tackleway that local estate agents were busy for months. Hugh Fearnley-W occasionally pops up to deliver his fish-sustainability schtick, while Michel Roux Jr recently visited multitasking cook/retailer/food writer/photographer Alastair Hendy’s small but perfectly formed restaurant (inside his Homestore in the High Street) for the charming C4 series Hidden Restaurants.  This Easter, there were sightings of Jude Law at old town pub the Crown, and Cate Blanchett stocking up at the Hastings branch of Borough Wines, Beers and Books.

Yet as distractingly pretty and A-list-seaside-day-trippy as it is, the area is also home to real people, including unprecedented quantities of artists (at one point there were more RAs per square mile in Hastings than anywhere else in the country. Suck on that, St Ives).  It’s also home to Europe’s largest remaining beach-launched fishing fleet, which, with boats no longer than 10 metres, also means sustainable fishing. Hastings is not only good for fish, it’s good to them, too.

For fine local fish, I recommend the following: St Clement’s in St Leonards, next-door to a proper old-school pub, the Horse and Groom. And (for an oyster fix) also the St Clement’s offshoot, the Old Custom House (Hastings Old Town). I’m a big fan, too, of the unpretentious Rock-a-Nore Kitchen, by the net huts. And you will not find a better local seafood arancino (nor indeed a mussel/prawn/smoked salmon/mozzarella pizza) than at the charmingly authentic Italian, Rustico, in the middle of town. Back in St Leonards, meanwhile, Graze on Grand does a great crispy salt and pepper squid and adds punch-packing “Asian broth” to Dungeness cod – considerably less reactive than it sounds. And most of this has happened in the past five years.

There has always been excellent trad fish and chips to be had around town
There has always been excellent trad fish and chips to be had around town, notably at Maggie’s (now under new ownership but – please god – without a Farrow and Ball “Downpipe-and-portholes” makeover: we love the melamine just as it is), and at the easy-going, family-friendly Whites Seafood and Steak Bar in George Street. However, arguably the town’s pre-eminent purveyor of things piscatorial was the local family empire Webbe’s, who have big and very dependable restaurant in Rock-a-Nore, close to the fishing fleet, and who run a cookery school in nearby Rye.

In 2012, when the Jerwood Gallery arrived (controversially – there are still tattered old signs around the town saying “No Jerwood!”; the site had previously been a coach park) right opposite Webbe’s on an area known as The Stade, it was not wildly surprising to find out who had won the tender for the café/restaurant.  More surprising was the fact that, with lovely sea views over the beached fleet from its balcony, Webbe’s at the Jerwood lacked its own entrance, and so was never going to be a destination for anyone not prepared to pay the gallery entrance fee, adding another £20 (for a family of four) to the restaurant/café tab. 

It’s a no fuss, semi-self-service (you choose, you pay, it’s delivered to the table) set-up on an airy, glassy first-floor corner of the elegant building. After 12 years in the hood I am used to the view, but still get a buzz when urban guests ooh at the fleet’s vibe: gritty, un-pretty, dieselly, fish-under-the-fingernails. In short, the town is nothing like St Ein’s Padstow. This is the un-Boden seaside; a little bit Cate but not very Gwyneth.  Saturday lunchtime and the clientele is predominantly arts-orientated retirees: no A-listers in sight. I order the seafood board – potted crab, soused herring, squid and prawn fritto misto, mackerel pâté and cured salmon; my date orders the smoked salmon with horseradish cream and pickled cucumber. I crave ginger beer; he wants dandelion and burdock, (which always smells of pub carpet to me).

I forensically kneecap my prawn and then wish I had a finger-bowl
And it’s all pretty much perfect. The vinegary herring sets my teeth on edge. I forensically knee-cap my prawn and then wish I had a finger-bowl.  We’re halfway through when my guest admits he forgot to order chips, as requested, which then arrive super-fast and hot and sufficiently burnished, though more wedgy than chippish if I were being picky.  So, restaurant or café? Well, the mayo is in sachets and the pepper is un-grindable; it’s prettily presented no-frills good food with some cracking art attached. The current Keith Tyson (Turner prize-winner 2002) is on until June. It’s a great exhibition; funny, clever, bold and cool, just like my town.