The £10,000 prize-winning book that transports you to colonial New York

A novel that transports its readers to the teeming, cart-filled streets of colonial New York has won Francis Spufford the 2017 RSL Ondaatje Prize, an award of £10,000 for “a distinguished work of fiction, non-fiction or poetry evoking the spirit of a place”.

Golden Hill (Faber & Faber) marked his debut in fiction, at the age of 52, but is certainly not his first book to appear on a short list. Five works of non-fiction — including The Child That Books Built — have earned him nominations for writing on everything from science to theology. He was short-listed in 2011 for the RSL Ondaatje Prize for Red Plenty, a “factional” account of Soviet Russia.

Announcing the award at the Travellers’ Club in London on Monday, the author and critic Henry Hitchings, speaking for the judges, said Golden Hill was “that rare thing: an ingenious novel that draws on profound research to evoke the spirit of another age, yet wears that research lightly. An astonishing achievement, intoxicating in its virtuosity.”

The book is both a picaresque story of a young Londoner attempting to make his way in New York and a celebration of the 18th-century novel as shaped by Smollett, Sterne, and Henry and Sarah Fielding.

Spufford, who lives near Cambridge and teaches writing at Goldsmiths College, University of London, has said he began it as an account of the city, “but then the characters… wandered over from the other side of my brain, and the expository stuff about the city could be sucked into the storytelling.”

Extracts from the six short-listed books
Last year’s RSL Ondaatje Prize short list was unusual in that it included a poetry collection — for the first time in seven years — and had no novels. This year, all but one of the books were fiction. The exception was The Outrun by Amy Liptrot (Canongate), a memoir of addiction and recovery and the part played in the latter by the natural world on Orkney.

The other books were:

 In A Land of Paper Gods by Rebecca Mackenzie (Tinder Press)
 Augustown by Kei Miller (Weidenfeld & Nicolson)
 Five Rivers Met on a Wooded Plain by Barney Norris (Doubleday)
 The Gustav Sonata by Rose Tremain (Chatto & Windus
Judging the prize with Hitchings were the cultural historian Alexandra Harris (short-listed last year for Weatherland, an account of how weather has been written and painted in England through the centuries), and the poet Mimi Khalvati.

Now in its 14th year, the Ondaatje Prize of the Royal Society of Literature is sponsored by Sir Christopher Ondaatje, the businessman, adventurer and writer. Last year’s winner was Nothing Is True and Everything Is Possible, by Peter Pomerantsev, an electrifying portrait of Vladimir Putin’s Russia.