Discover Rhodes’s hidden gem in the secluded beauty of Lindian Village

Luxurious Lindian Village caters for discerning travellers in search of a relaxing holiday in an unpretentious setting with personalised service.

It looks like a picture-perfect Greek village. Sugar-cube houses shimmering in Mediterranean sun. Streams winding between eucalyptus and bougainvillea. Cobbled streets leading to the beach.

But a village where you can choose to have a pool in your garden or a Jacuzzi on your balcony? A spa, five restaurants, sea-view swimming pool and private beach? Where everyone smiles and all is as neat as a pin?

This is Lindian Village, a 60-acre, five-star, intimate family-run resort hotel on the sleepy, south-east coast of Rhodes. It’s the kind of place where they fuss over your kids, teach you to sail or scuba dive, or just leave you in peace for a romantic tête-à-tête in your Jacuzzi-for-two.

The Ofsted-standard crèche and kids’ club give mum and dad plenty of time to relax on the private beach or in the spa
Those sugar-cube houses actually contain pairs of spacious suites: private swimming pool and garden downstairs, veranda with Jacuzzi upstairs. Elsewhere are stylish double rooms and family suites with balconies and rainforest showers.

Children love it. The Ofsted-standard crèche and kids’ club are run by childcare specialists Worldwide Kids, with loads of age-appropriate activities from water sports to arts and crafts.

That gives mum and dad plenty of time to relax on the private beach, or in the luxurious spa resort with four treatment rooms, open-air massage pavilion and indoor swimming pool.

If you can tear yourself away, the real ancient Greece is almost on your doorstep at Lindos. With stone flags echoing to donkey hooves Lindos is the “authentic” counterpart of Lindian Village, and it’s topped off with a 3,000-year-old Dorian acropolis that will take your breath away.

Dream holidays

Sun-kissed beaches, traditional villages and historic treasures make Greece a popular holiday destination. 

Flying to 11 airports on the Greek mainland and islands, and with a range of fantastic places to stay, British Airways offers holidays to suit all tastes and budgets. 