Revealed: The nationalities most likely to invade your personal space

I’m sure we’ve all experienced a breach of personal space. The worst I encountered was in Bosnia where the owner of a hotel I was staying in tried to get in the shower with me. A clear cut case if ever I saw one.

More recently I found myself nose-to-nose with a drunken fisherman in Oban, who completely forgot the concept of personal space as he regaled me with his tales from the high seas. I really don’t wish to get that close to a fisherman again.

However, new research suggests that perceptions of personal space vary from country to country (though most nationalities, it seems, would draw the line at entering someone’s shower without an invite).

For the study – titled Preferred Interpersonal Differences: A Global Comparison – researches interviewed 8,943 people from 42 different countries to find out how close they could get to another person while still feeling comfortable.

Participants in the study were given a graphic – which depicted two people standing two metres apart – and asked to indicate the point at which they would no longer feel comfortable in proximity to a close friend, a stranger, and a casual acquaintance.

So which nations value their space and which countries like to keep it cosy? Well, when it comes to complete strangers, participants from Romania preferred to keep the most distance.

To be more precise, Romanian participants, on average, liked to keep 140cm between them and a stranger, which is worth bearing in mind if you’re bound for Bucharest anytime soon.

After Romania, the study found participants from Hungary and Saudi Arabia – who recorded distances of 131cm and 127cm respectively – valued personal space the most.

The nationalities that need their personal space

Romania - 140 (cm)
Hungary - 131 
Saudi Arabia - 127
Turkey - 123
Uganda - 122
Pakistan - 120
Estonia - 118
Colombia - 117
Hong Kong - 116
China - 116
At the other end of the spectrum were participants from Argentina (77cm), Peru (80cm) and Bulgaria (81cm). And that’s interesting: despite being neighbours, Romania and Bulgaria seem to be diametrically opposed when it comes to their opinions on personal space. I bet their border pubs are interesting places.

When it came to close chums, participants from Saudi Arabia (97cm), Hungary (83cm) and Canada (74cm) preferred keeping the most distance, while participants in Norway (35cm), Ukraine (40cm) and Argentina (40cm) felt most comfortable cosying up.

And casual acquaintances? A similar story: Hungary (109cm), Saudi Arabia (105cm) and Uganda (102cm) were happiest keeping their distance, while Argentina (59cm), Peru (63cm) and Bulgaria (64cm) were comfortable up close.

The nationalities that may just invade yours

Argentina - 77 (cm) 
Peru - 80
Bulgaria - 81
Ukraine - 86 
Austria - 88
Slovakia - 89
Russia - 89 
Greece - 91
Serbia - 92
Italy - 93
Participants from the UK were, typically, somewhere in the middle of the spectrum: conservative, but with a small “c”. When it came to friends they liked keeping a distance of around 56cm; strangers 99cm; and acquaintances 80cm.

The authors of the study were not able to explain exactly why there are cross-cultural differences in interpersonal space, though they did draw some conclusions.  

“Our study indicates that individual characteristics (age and gender) influence interpersonal space preferences and that some variation in results can be explained by temperature in a given region,” they suggest.

“Such differences might be underpinned by cultural norms, but at the same time these norms could be associated with differences in levels of certain psychological and ecological variables.”