Six books you should definitely take on holiday this summer

Last week, the Royal Society of Literature revealed the shortlist for the Ondaatje Prize, an award of £10,000 for ‘a distinguished work of fiction, non-fiction or poetry evoking the spirit of a place’. Here are extracts from the six books.

1. The Outrun, by Amy Liptrot (Canongate)

When I came to Papay, I was attracted to the idea that, by living and walking within its coast, I could become familiar with the whole island and know all of its residents. Small islands are easier to comprehend than cities and I thought I could be able to understand it all.

However, I find out about the “coastline paradox”, which explains how it’s impossible accurately to measure the length of a coastline. The smaller the scale used to measure, the longer it becomes: a coastline is fractal, breaking into ever smaller inlets and cracks and promontories and bumps, from hundreds of miles to millimetres.

This accounts for the vastly different estimates for the length of coastline in Orkney and how, the longer I am on Papay, the more there is to discover. I am thrilled and daunted.

People with longer sober times in AA say that the good things about their new lives are things they didn’t imagine, things they couldn’t explain to a newcomer. They say that what you think you wanted is likely not, in fact, to be what you want.

I never saw myself as, and resist becoming, the wholesome “outdoors” type. But the things I experience keep dragging me in. There are moments that thrill and glow: the few seconds a silver male hen harrier flies beside my car one afternoon; the porpoise surfacing around our small boat; the wonderful sight of a herd of cattle let out on grass after a winter indoors, skipping and jumping, tails straight up to the sky with joy. I am free-falling but grabbing these things as I plunge. Maybe this is what happens. I’ve given up drugs, don’t believe in God and love has gone wrong, so now I find my happiness and flight in the world around me.

2. In A Land of Paper Gods, by Rebecca Mackenzie (Tinder Press/Headline)

The Girls’ Building used to be a hotel for foreigners and had been sold to the mission for just one dollar. It was covered in a tumble of passion flowers. It was large and leaky, and I had lived in its dormitories since I was six.

Whenever I stood on the balcony and looked out over the school, I would be reminded of standing on the deck of a ship. And whenever I thought of ships, I’d remember saying goodbye to my parents for the first time at Yuncheng harbour.

As the 27 of us from the Northern Provinces gathered with our suitcases and trunks, knapsacks, dolls and slingshots, between the ship and the land ran many strands of red string. Mother and Father gave me one and said, “Don’t let go.”

I followed the big children up the gangplank holding my string. The red string was a goodbye tradition. We children on deck held one end, and our mothers and fathers on the cobbled quayside held the other. Each child had his or her own string. The Gable parents held three strings, one for each of their daughters. Then I felt my whole self joggle and shake, my legs, my arms, my teeth. “Mother!” I called. “Father!” I clung to Mary Gable. I hadn’t realised that I couldn’t come back down.

Underneath us the brown water churned, a terrible smell of fish and sludge rose, and the ship shuddered out of the harbour. Holding my string, I couldn’t see Mother’s face properly because of her sunhat; just her mouth, which was stretched wide, and both hands waving. I watched her and Father shrink. I felt the red thread in my fingers pull, pull, pull until it snapped and went slack. Down the Huang Ho we tumbled and out into the North China Sea.

3. Augustown, by Kei Miller (Weidenfeld & Nicolson)

First you must imagine the sky, blue and cloudless if that helps, or else the luminously black spread of night. Next – and this is the important bit – you must imagine yourself inside it, floating beside me. Below us, the green and blue disc of the Earth.

Now focus. 17° 59’ 0’’ North, 76° 44’ 0’’ West. Down there is the Caribbean, though not the bits you might have seen in a brochure. We are beyond the aquamarine waters, with their slow manatees and graceful sea turtles, and beyond the beaches littered with sweet almonds. We have gone inland. Down there is a dismal little valley on a dismal little island.

Notice the hills, how one of them carries on its face a scar – a section where bulldozers and tractors have sunk their rusty talons into its cheeks, scraped away the brush and the trees and left behind a white crater of marl. The eyesore can be seen from 10 or more miles away. To the people of this valley, it feels as if they wear the scar on their own skin – as if a kind of ruin has befallen them.

From up here, the ramshackle valley looks like a pot of cornmeal porridge, rusting tin roofs stirred into its hot, bubbling vortex. […] The streets run in unplanned directions; paved roads often thin into dirt paths; wide streets narrow into alleys lined with zinc or scrapboard fences. If solid concrete houses rise like sentinels at the beginning of a road, the architecture will devolve into clumsy board shacks by the time you get to the cul-de-sac. If on one road the houses are separated into tidy lots, on the road just over they are crowded together and lean into each other as if for comfort. This is a community that does not quite come together.

4. Five Rivers Met on a Wooded Plain, by Barney Norris (Doubleday)

Salisbury Cathedral is the most beautiful building I have ever seen. I don’t quite mean the look of the place. Buildings are not beautiful because of their shapes or patterns, the bricks or stones that make them. What are transfixing are the ideas and dreaming and longing they encase. They stand as memorials to the lives of the people who made them, who raised the money to raise the walls, who buried the men who fell from the scaffolding.

What I see when I watch Salisbury Cathedral cutting the air is a diagram of prayer, the hope at the centre of my life expressed as the burning arrow of the spire shot into the sky, asking us to look up beyond the everyday, see the size and possibility and quietness of the landscape, and imagine something greater than we are. It asks us to stop walking and think. It demands we look outside ourselves.

I have stared at that spire every night for a year now, and I think it is the purest picture of the human heart I have seen. It seems to me from this vantage point that the city has been built as an illustration of the way all our ordinary acts, our cups of tea and walks to the postbox and phone bills and potato peelings, are shot through with a heartbreaking and extraordinary love. That there exists in all of us a song waiting to be sung which is as heart-stopping and vertiginous as the peak of the cathedral. That is the secret meaning of this quiet city, where the spire soars into the blue, where rivers and stories weave into one another, where lives intertwine.

5. Golden Hill, by Francis Spufford (Faber & Faber)

As a mason must build a wall one brick at a time, though the finished wall be smooth and sheer, so in individual pieces did Mr Smith’s consciousness return to him, the next day, as he lay in the truckle bed of Mrs Lee’s gable-end bedroom, and assembled the world again.

First, the white ceiling. Then the slow realisation that this was not the dark, damp timber six inches above his nose to which he had woken for six weeks in his bunk aboard Henrietta. Then the memory of his purpose; and the whole variorum mosaic of the evening before; and a burning curiosity.

The light through the gable window was full sunshine. He jumped out of bed and threw the casement wide – rooftops and bell towers greeted him; a jumble, not much elevated, of stepped Dutchwork eaves and ordinary English tile, with the greater eminences of churches poking through, steepled and cupola’d, and behind a slow-swaying fretwork of masts; the whole prospect washed with, bright with, aglitter with, the water last night’s clouds had shed, and one – two – three – he counted ’em – six crumbs of dazzling light hoisted high that must be the weathercocks of the city of New-York, riding golden in the hurrying levels of the sky where blue followed white followed blue.

The Broad Way, it turned out as he leaned and craned from the window, was a species of cobbled avenue, only middling broad, lined on Mrs Lee’s side with small trees. Wagon-drivers, hawkers with handcarts and quick-paced pedestrians were passing in both directions. Somewhere below too, hidden mostly by the branches, someone was sweeping the last leaves, and singing slow in an African tongue as if their heart had long ago broken, and they were now rattling the pieces together desultorily in a bag.

6. The Gustav Sonata, by Rose Tremain (Chatto & Windus)

When Gustav deliberately knocked to the floor the books which had been placed on the shelf, Herr Hodler swore. “Scheisse!” The word seemed to echo around the silent kitchen. It had always been part of Emilie’s credo of self-mastery that swearing was an unpleasant indulgence, never to be allowed. And now the schoolteacher had transgressed this sacred edict.

It made Gustav want to laugh. He felt better. He apologised to Herr Hodler and helped him to pick up the books and rearrange them on the shelf. When he saw that one was titled A Short History of Switzerland, he said to Herr Hodler, “I don’t know anything about the history of Switzerland. All I know is the war didn’t come here. It went to Germany and Russia and other places and all the buildings were bombed. Is that right?”

“Yes,” said Herr Hodler. “More or less. Except millions of people died, too. What we believe in Switzerland is that we should avoid conflict, especially being drawn into the conflicts of others. We call it ‘neutrality’. Do you know what this means?”

“No.”

“It means we believe in ourselves. We protect our own. And you know, this is a good way to be in your life, Gustav. Have you ever eaten a coconut?”

“What?”

“You know coconuts have a very tough outer shell?”

“I’ve never eaten one.”

“Well, the shell is hard and fibrous, difficult to penetrate. It protects the nourishing coconut flesh and milk inside. And that is how Switzerland is and how Swiss people should be – like coconuts. We protect ourselves – all the good things that we have and that we are – with hard and determined yet rational behaviour – our neutrality. Do you understand what I’m saying?”

“That I’ve got to be like a coconut?”

“Yes. Then you will not be hurt.”