The world's first official Star Wars-themed hotel to open at Walt Disney World Orlando?

Have you sensed a great disturbance in The Force of late? It may well be because Disney has hinted that it might build the world's biggest and best Star Wars-themed hotel.

The idea has been revealed in a survey, sent out by Disney through a third party, to gauge public interest in the potential project, which would be part of the upcoming Star Wars Land at Disney World in Florida (due to open in 2019).

Details sent out with the survey outline the current concept: a hotel resembling a spaceship from the Star Wars universe where guests would be able to take part in an immersive and interactive Star Wars story experience.

• The most amazing hotel experiences in the world

These details also suggest that guests would be able to take part in the narrative events as they unfold, undertaking 'secret missions', mixing with characters from the films (who would roam the corridors and public areas), duelling with lightsabers and learning to pilot spacecraft.

The survey offers further indication of what amenities might be on offer, including a pool area, water park and fitness centre. Meals would be taken in the 'cantina' (hopefully with live music from a Bith band), and food and drink would be served by droid butlers.

Rooms would accommodate up to four people, who would be able to enjoy views of the galaxy from their windows.

Available for two-night stays only, rooms would reportedly cost $900 to $1,000 (£700 to £780) per person. This would include all meals, as well as admission to the theme park.

A Disney spokesperson said: "We know our guests love all things in the world of Star Wars, and we're continually exploring new ideas and gathering guest feedback as we develop plans to bring Star Wars to life at Disneyland Park".

• The world's best character-themed hotel suites

Star Wars Land will be the company's joint-largest single-theme land expansion - the other is a similar Star Wars theme park under construction at Disneyland Park in California.

Disney is closely guarding the details at present, although both parks will reportedly feature a life-size and controllable model of the Millennium Falcon.

If the hotel goes ahead, it will be at least 2019 before Star Wars buffs can head to Florida to live out their sci-fi fantasies.

Until then, the best alternative is Hotel Sidi Driss in Tunisia, which fans will recognise as Luke Skywalker's childhood home on Tattooine. Many of the original props are still on display in and around the hotel.

• 50 of the world's most unusual hotels