Chase Offering 100,000 Ultimate Rewards Points On A New Mortgage

Chase has done it again. Last year, it set the credit card rewards industry ablaze with the Sapphire Reserve card. It offered 100,000 bonus points, worth $1,500 in travel, for new card members who met spending requirements. Now it's offering 100,000 points if you get a mortgage through Chase.

According to the Chase website, you can earn 100,000 Ultimate Rewards points when you finance a new home through Chase. The points can be used for travel, gift cards, or cash, among other things. Applications must be submitted by August 6, 2017.

As with any offer, it's important to read the fine print. For example, to qualify, you must have a Chase Sapphire, Sapphire Reserve or Sapphire Preferred credit card prior to May 7, 2017. There are some other requirements:

The offer applies only to new, residential first mortgage purchase loans. It does not apply, for example, to a mortgage refinance loan.
The offer is not transferable, is limited to one per property at any given time, and may be discontinued at any time without notice.
The 100,000 points will post to the primary cardholder's account 10 weeks after closing a purchase mortgage with Chase.
This offer is on top of another Chase mortgage bonus. Chase also offers a $595 bonus when a mortgage customer enrolls in automatic payments from a new or existing Chase checking account and select paperless mortgage statements.

The Tax Man Cometh

Credit card rewards earned, well, through credit cards, are generally not taxable, according to creditcards.com. According to that same article, however, rewards earned from opening a bank account are taxable. In the case of the Chase offer, the fine print suggests the 100,000 points for obtaining a mortgage are taxable as well:  "Your participation in the program may result in the receipt of taxable income from Chase and we may be required to send to you, and file with the IRS, a Form 1099-MISC (miscellaneous income). You are responsible for any tax liability, including disclosure requirements, related to participating in the program. Please consult your tax advisor if you have any questions about your personal tax situation."

Rates

While 100,000 bonus points are nice, what really matters is the interest rate you can get. Rates vary based on a number of factors, including the size of the loan and location. Your credit score is also a critical factor, which can result in a higher or lower rate. With those caveats in mind, I checked the rate Chase was offering for a $250,000 mortgage in Virginia.

According to the Chase website, the rate on a 30-year fixed loan is 4.00% with 0.75% in points. That brings the APR to 4.104%. (According to Chase, the "annual percentage rate (APR) is the cost of credit over the term of the loan expressed as an annual rate. The APR shown here is based on interest rate, points and certain estimated finance charges. Your actual APR may be different.") I track current mortgage rates on my personal finance blog, and the Chase rate appears to be very competitive. That being said, it's always important to compare rates before making such an important financial decision.

 

Rob Berger founded Doughroller.net, a personal finance website, allcards.com, a credit card and banking website, and Dough Roller Money Tips, a free weekly newsletter.