Amid Criticism, The Kushner Family Pushes A New Jersey Luxury Development

White House senior adviser Jared Kushner’s sister Nicole Kushner Meyer spent the weekend in Beijing promoting the company's Jersey City, New Jersey real estate development to a ballroom full of wealthy Chinese investors.

That's according to the Washington Post, which reported over the weekend that over several hours of slide shows and presentations, representatives from the Kushner family business urged Chinese citizens to consider investing hundreds of thousands of dollars in a luxury apartment complex that would help them secure what’s known as an investor visa.

While the event underscores the extent to which Kushner’s private business interests have the potential to collide with his role as a top official in his father-in-law’s White House, it also highlights the lengths the Kushner family will go to promote a sprawling project back home in New Jersey.

One Journal Square, a $400 million project in Jersey City, will consists of two residential towers, one slated to rise 79 stories and the other topping out at 56 stories. Kushner Companies in partnership with the KABR Group is developing the project. The 79-story structure would be among the tallest buildings in the state. The complex will hold up to 1,725 residential units with 89,000 square feet of retail, 127,000 square feet of office space and nearly 1,000 parking spots. Construction is scheduled to begin in early 2018.

Jared Kushner, who has officially stepped down as CEO of Kushner Companies, has divested himself from the project now that he serves as an advisor to the president.

Kushner and his wife, Ivanka Trump, were hired by her father, President Donald Trump, as senior aides. Instead of selling his assets and placing the proceeds in an independently managed trust, Kushner will transfer ownership of some of his assets to his brother and to a trust overseen by his mother.

Saturday’s event in Beijing was hosted by the Chinese company Qiaowai, which connects U.S. companies with Chinese investors, The Post reported. Qiaowai is working with the Kushner company to secure funding for the New Jersey project presented to investors, the paper says. Promotional materials tout the buildings’ proximity to Manhattan and note that the project will create more than 6,000 jobs.