New NUS president is self-confessed former drug dealer who did not go to university

The new National Union of Students  (NUS) president is a self-confessed former drug dealer who did not go to university.

Shakira Martin, 28, who once claimed to be more radical than the Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, was elected as NUS president at their annual conference in Brighton on Wednesday.

She unseated Malia Bouattia, whose term as president was marred by allegations of anti-Semitism after she called her first university a "Zionist outpost" and criticised “mainstream Zionist-led media outlets”.

Ms Martin, who was seen as the underdog candidate, described how being involved in ?dealing drugs taught her a host of important skills for the world of work such as business acumen, confidentiality, data protection, customer service and mathematics.  

“Where I grew up was a deprived area, where a lot of people either sell drugs or take drugs,” she told The Guardian during an interview in 2015. 

“When I left home, I needed money. I was only receiving £44.50 as income support. A friend called one day and said she had a little job for me.”

Ms Martin, who left home aged 16, explained that she wasn't selling the drugs, but acted like a courier. She said she was involved with drug dealing for around a month, but gave up because “it wasn’t for me”.

“What I did realise was that the skills behind doing it were business skills," she said.

"There was confidentiality, there was data protection, there was maths, there was customer service.”

Ms Martin, who is currently the NUS vice president for further education, did not go to university. She left school aged 16 and enrolled at a sixth form college, but dropped out three months later.

She also started, but did not complete, a legal secretary course and two social work courses. She later enrolled at Lewisham College where she trained as a teacher.

Ms Bouattia, whose bid for a second term in office was defeated, courted controversy during her term as NUS president.

Last October, the Commons home affairs committee concluded that comments made by Ms Bouattia describing Birmingham University as a "Zionist outpost" smacked of "outright racism".

In scathing findings, the committee said that she did not appear to take the issue of campus anti-Semitism "sufficiently seriously" and showed a "worrying disregard" for her duty to represent all students and promote balanced and respectful debate.

Ms Bouattia's statement in a co-authored 2011 blog that Birmingham "has the largest Jsoc (Jewish Society) in the country whose leadership is dominated by Zionist activists" was condemned in the MPs' report as "unacceptable, and even more so from a public figure such as the president of the NUS".

However, an internal NUS report found that Ms Bouattia had been “genuine in expressing her regret”, adding that she had “considered the impact of what she says” and had since spoken out against anti-Semitism. The report concluded that "no further action" should be taken against her. 

On Wednesday Ms Martin said she was "honoured and humbled" to have been elected as national president. "I take this as a vote of trust that our members believe I can lead our national movement to be the fighting and campaigning organisation we need it to be, representing the breadth of our diverse membership," she said.

"Further Education made me who I am today and I look forward to sharing stories of just how powerful all forms of education can be when we're all given access to it. During my term in office, I want to spend my time listening, learning and leading."

Ms Martin gained 402 votes, compared to 272 for Ms Bouattia. A third candidate, Tom Harwood, gained 35 votes.