Fewer than half of 13 and 14-year-old Scots pupils can write properly after decade of SNP government

Fewer than half of 13 and 14-year-old Scottish pupils can write well and the proportion who are functionally illiterate has more than doubled, according to official figures that laid bare the SNP’s “shameful” education record.

The Scottish Government statistics showed the proportion of youngsters in the second year of secondary school who reach the expected standard for writing fell from 64 per cent in 2012 to 49 per cent last year.

In an astonishing indictment of the Nationalists, the percentage not able to write to even the minimum set standard increased from seven per cent to 16 per cent – around one in six all S2 pupils.

Contrary to Nicola Sturgeon’s claims that progress is being made at closing the ‘attainment gap’, the figures found little evidence that the gulf in performance between wealthy and poor pupils has closed since she succeeded Alex Salmond as First Minister in 2014.

Instead it concluded that standards have declined among S2 youngsters from all backgrounds since 2012, with six out of ten children from the most deprived backgrounds failing to meet the benchmark for writing.

The study also found that the proportion of children in the final year of primary school who can write well has declined from 72 per cent to 65 per cent since 2012.

There has a slight drop in reading ability among P4 and P7 pupils, while only 49 per cent of youngsters in the second year of secondary school had good listening and talking skills.

John Swinney, the SNP Education Minister, admitted the findings were “simply not good enough” and it was “imperative” that the system is reformed. He has outlined plans to give headteachers more autonomy from councils, echoing changes introduced in England years ago.

The Educational Institute of Scotland, the country’s largest teaching union, blamed excessive workload linked to a new exam system and cuts to budgets and teacher numbers. Larry Flanagan, its general secretary, insisted “our schools have continued to perform well.”

But Holyrood’s opposition parties said the findings further exposed the SNP’s appalling education record on the tenth anniversary of them taking power and argued Scotland’s children had paid for the Nationalists’ “obsession” with independence.

The figures from Scottish Survey of Literacy and Numeracy (SSLN), which Ms Swinney is abolishing, follow a major study published in December that showed Scotland has tumbled down international league tables for maths, reading and science and is now lagging behind other parts of the UK.

Iain Gray, Scottish Labour’s education spokesman, said: “These figures are the education legacy of ten years of SNP government and they are an absolute disgrace.

“No child should have their life chances determined by their background – yet that is exactly what is happening under a Nationalist government obsessed with the constitution.”

Liz Smith, the Scottish Tories’ Shadow Education Minister, said: “These are shameful results which show that over its ten years in office this SNP government has failed a generation.”

Around 10,100 pupils in 2,250 schools took part in the survey, half of which were selected to take part in the writing assessment.

Pupils were assessed by asking them to submit two scripts on different subjects for different purposes, such as describing an event or expressing an opinion. They were then marked by independent assessors using five criteria.

The proportion of girls in P4 who met the required writing standard was 69 per cent compared to only 56 per cent of boys. The gap widened by P7, with 74 per cent of girls and 56 per cent of boys being able to write well.

However, by the second year of secondary school only 57 per cent of girls and 42 per cent of boys were deemed to have a good standard of writing. The study found that the proportion of S2 girls performing well had fallen 13 points since 2012, while the drop for boys was 16 points.

It also confirmed there continues to be a huge gulf in performance between rich and poor children of all ages, with 54 per cent of P4 pupils from the most deprived families writing well compared to 69 per cent of their peers from wealthy backgrounds.

For youngsters in the final year of primary school, 52 per cent of the poorest and 72 per cent of the richest children met the required standard of writing. However, by S2 the proportions had plummeted to 40 per cent and 59 per cent respectively.

While the performance of the poorest P4 children improved between 2012 and 2014, the study found it fell back again in the following two years - after Ms Sturgeon took power.

The proportion of the most deprived P7 youngsters who can write well has fallen by nine points since 2012, compared to a seven-point drop for the wealthiest children.

The decline was even more marked for S2 pupils, with the percentage of the poorest children writing to the required standard falling 14 points compared to a 15 point drop for the richest youngsters.

“The deprivation gap in writing attainment did not change significantly between 2012 and 2016 at any stage,” the study said.

Speaking during a visit to Craigroyston Primary School in Edinburgh, Mr Swinney said there were “four key areas” that required improvement.

The Deputy First Minister said: “We need to better understand the progress of individual pupils, be clear about the standards expected in our classrooms while stripping out bureaucracy to free teachers to teach, and ensure literacy skills are fully embedded across the curriculum."

Highlighting new standardised assessments and funding being handed directly to headteachers, he added: "These reforms are not an overnight solution, it will take time before we see their full effect and we must stay the course.”

Mr Flanagan said: “These particular figures relate to 2016, a session when teachers and pupils were being placed under great strain through over assessment linked to new qualifications and the resultant excessive workload demands."