Mel B Claims Ex Sabotaged Daughter’s Reunion With Dad Eddie Murphy

The Spice Girls star split from the comedian before Angel's birth.

Not only did Mel B‘s husband Stephen Belafonte beat, cheat and swindle her millions, he thwarted an emotional reunion between the Spice Girls star’s daughter b and her biological father, Eddie Murphy, she claims.

According to Los Angeles court documents obtained by RadarOnline.com, the 41-year-old singer — legally known as Melanie Brown — says she arranged for a meeting between the 10-year-old and the famous comedian, 56, in February to take place in mid-March.

“Up to this point they had not had a relationship,” she writes in her declaration related to a temporary restraining order request.

PHOTOS: Spice Girls Star Mel B Reconciles With Heartbroken Mom After A Decade-Long Feud

However, she alleges Belafonte, 41, sabotaged the plans by an example of “identity theft.”

“Respondent became aware of this meeting and in an effort to derail the meet, took me phone without my knowledge or consent and texted Angel’s father’s assistant at 4:30 am impersonating/claiming to be me,” the mother of three continues. “I don’t know the content of Respondent’s text, but I do know that Angel’s father canceled the meeting with Angel as a result.”

Murphy and Brown infamously split months before Angel’s April 2007 birth, and the actor even publicly doubted that the child was his own. But a court-ordered paternity test proved he was indeed the dad later that year.

PHOTOS: Abuse, Stalking & Swindling Millions: Mel B’s Claims Against Husband From Hell

The star previously claimed her daughter and her father had maintained a bond — but it appears she wasn’t being honest with fans.

It appears Brown also lied to protect her husband over ten years of marriage. Despite denying her husband had ever been abusive, she now claims in court that Belafonte repeatedly punched, choked and berated her in vicious beatings . She also alleges that he impregnated their children’s sexy young nanny, and blocked her from calling for help after an impulsive suicide attempt.

Brown was granted the restraining order, and the couple will meet in court for a hearing on April 24.