Riyad Mahrez ready to push for a move away from Leicester with Arsenal, Chelsea and Tottenham all keen
London's three biggest clubs are all interested in last season's PFA Players' Player of the Year, who is ready to push for a move away from Leicester City this summer

Riyad Mahrez will push for a move away from Leicester City this summer alerting London’s three biggest clubs, according to reports.

The Algerian was instrumental in Leicester’s stunning title success last season, with a number of clubs expressing an interest in signing him in the summer.

However, Mahrez listened to former manager Claudio Ranieri’s plea to spend another season at the club, instead striking up a gentleman’s agreement that he would be allowed to leave at the end of the 2016/17 campaign.

And the Telegraph report that Mahrez is poised to tell the club that he is ready to quit after three-and-a-half seasons at the King Power, owing to his determination to continue playing European football.

North London clubs Arsenal and Tottenham are thought to be at the front of the queue for Mahrez’s signature.
Arsenal were heavily linked with a move for the player last summer and went close to signing his team-mate, Jamie Vardy.

It seems likely Arsene Wenger will want to bolster his squad after an exceptionally underwhelming campaign, although it currently appears Arsenal will be unable to offer Mahrez the Champions League football that he craves.

Spurs are another option. Mauricio Pochettino is desperate to add a winger to his squad and the club were interested in a move for Wilfried Zaha until the Crystal Palace decided to represent the Ivory Coast.

Tottenham made an enquiry over Mahrez in the January transfer window, but were told at the time that he was not for sale at any price.

Chelsea could also make a move for Mahrez, who was named the PFA Players' Player of the Year last season. However the Telegraph report that their interest hinges on whether or not Willian is allowed to leave this summer.

Quite how much Leicester demand for the 26-year-old remains to be seen, with his performances notably poorer this season than in their unforgettable title-winning campaign.

This year he has managed just six goals in the Premier League and registered three assists, a drastic downturn from the season before, in which he scored 17 times and made 11 assists, as well as picking up ten Man of the Match awards.

But his performances in the Champions League did impress this season. He scored four times as Leicester reached the quarter-finals of the competition.

Leicester are currently in 9th-place in the league, with games against Tottenham and Bournemouth remaining. 