Taking On Airbnb At Home: Upscale Vacation Rental Startup Onefinestay Expands To San Francisco

Luxury home rental startup onefinestay is expanding to San Francisco. The City by the Bay is the seventh to be added to the company roster, which already included London, Paris, Rome, New York, Los Angeles and Miami. San Francisco is also the first major new market the company has added since promising to add at least 40 new locations by 2021. 

“Our sights have long been set on San Francisco as part of our expansion plans; it’s a premier and dynamic city, world-renowned for business and leisure travel, and a hub of innovation in the real estate and home rental space – a very obvious next step for onefinestay,” said CEO and co-founder Evan Frank. Bookings for 15 properties open Wednesday with prices ranging from $365 per night for a loft in Dogpatch to $1,129 for a five bedroom in Haight-Ashbury.

The company expects to charge as much as $4,000 per night as the portfolio grows. Guest stays will begin in June.

London-based onefinestay got its start in 2009, when co-founder and former CEO Greg Marsh had what the company has dubbed his "no light-bulb moment." Returning home over the holidays he noticed that all the apartments in the nicest parts of London were empty, while the neighboring hotels were full.

Marsh joined up with Frank and two other co-founders to leverage his observation, convincing owners of the city's primer homes to rent them out while they were gone. "It was really about breathing life back into these cities, but also exposing the unique character of the real estate," says Frank.

For homeowners the arraignment offered some financial liquidity and, the company argues, piece of mind that their most valuable asset wouldn't sit empty, often for months at a time. Last year, the average guest stayed for eight days and spent $4,500. Onefinestay charges a steep 50/50 split in most cases, so homeowners saw about half that. (Airbnb charges hosts between 3% and 5% and guests between 6% and 12%.)

To attract travelers accustomed to the finest hotels, the company carefully curates the portfolio of homes and insists upon exclusivity. They deck out the homes with top-shelf linens, toiletries and local treats. A "greeter" welcomes visitors to the homes, which are meticulously cleaned before and after each stay, so homeowners and guests alike will never know the other was there. Frank estimates the company spends at least $1,000 upfront to get a home ready for listing--professional photography, cataloging every piece of furniture and quirks of how the air conditioning, for example, works--which he says justifies it's high cut.

“We are not just putting up a website and allowing others to list their homes and then transact,” says Frank. “We are actually taking full accountability for the experience.”

By 2016 onefinestay had over 2,500 homes--5,340 bedrooms--on the platform. In April 2016, European hotel group Accor acquired onefinestay for $170 million. Onefinestay will operate independently, and Accor committed to invest $70 million more in growing the business, which is not yet profitable. Earlier this year onefinestay announced Collections, a program to expand into satellites to its primary cities--the Hamptons, for example, will be run out of New York City. The portfolios in these places will be smaller and sometimes seasonal. Additionally, the company says it will launch in Boston and Milan in the second quarter.

On the surface onefinestay looks at like a fancier, more expensive Airbnb. While operationally the companies are quite different, this likeness is perhaps the biggest headwind facing onefinestay as it looks to expand, especially into San Francisco.

In taking on San Francisco, onefinestay is entering one of the hottest hospitality markets in the country. In 2015 the city's hotels averaged 86.6% occupancy, according to the San Francisco Center for Economic Development. Airbnb, however, is the undeniable elephant in the room. The $31 billion vacation rental giant got its start in San Francisco and maintains its headquarters there. Reports show the company has more than 8,000 listings in the city. Moreover, Airbnb reportedly acquired Canadian high-end rental company Luxury Retreats for $300 million earlier this year, beating out onefinestay parent Accor.

"We have great respect for Airbnb's success, and are grateful for the work they've done building out the category," says Frank. "Our model is different however - we are providing an end-to-end, high touch management service for our homeowners. In situations where homeowners with special homes are seeking this high level of service, we believe we're the perfect fit."