10 Hot Properties For Your Viewing Pleasure

Architects are prolifically altering skylines, sports, and history with recent or future projects. This includes residential towers, historic building conversions, stadiums and islands—both home and abroad. Oh, and the real estate market sizzles on too. Here are 10 of the hottest properties creating buzz in the USA and beyond.

666 Fifth Avenue (New York)
Perhaps the address was an ominous sign. The planned Zaha Hadid-designed supertall tower at 666 Fifth Avenue hit another snag as potential investor, Chinese firm Anbang Insurance Group (owner of The Waldorf-Astoria), dropped its bid to buy a major stake (or was asked to)—reportedly related to avoiding potential improper foreign links to Kushner Companies which owns the property. Kushner Companies’ divested former CEO, Jared Kushner is currently serving as a senior advisor to his father-in-law, U.S. President Donald Trump.

According to The Wall Street Journal, Kushner’s father Charles planned to redevelop the family-owned Manhattan office into a 1,400-foot mixed-used skyscraper with a hotel, retail space and luxury condominiums. But that was before Trump’s election as president complicated the deal.

The scrutinized deal—viewed by some as a potential bonanza for Kushner’s family (aided by his new-found prominent government role)—could have attracted a federal probe, according to published reports. Kushner Companies, seeking an influx of cash for construction, is already in discussions with other potential investors to move the bold project forward. 

"Kushner Companies is no longer in discussions with Anbang about 666 Fifth Avenue's potential redevelopment, and our firms have mutually agreed to end talks regarding the property,” said a company spokesman. “Kushner Companies remains in active, advanced negotiations around 666 Fifth Avenue with a number of potential investors."

Current plans will add 40 stories onto the skyscraper, including building down to its lower core. The tower will reportedly house über luxury condos (up to a controversial $6,000 per square foot, a.k.a. the “bonanza effect”), a hotel of undetermined size, and 500,000 square feet of retail. Construction was originally scheduled from 2019 to 2025.