High Risk: Tornado Watches Issued as Dangerous Severe Weather Outbreak Continues in the Southeast and Ohio Valley, Including a Potential for Significant Tornadoes

A dangerous severe weather outbreak is underway, including the threat of strong tornadoes, in some of the same areas hit by severe thunderstorms and tornadoes Monday in the Southeast.

NOAA's Storm Prediction Center has issued a rare "high risk" for portions of south-central Georgia and west-central South Carolina, meaning that widespread severe storms are expected through this evening.  

Happening Now

NOAA's Storm prediction Center has issued the following severe weather watches: 

A PARTICULARLY DANGEROUS SITUATION tornado watch valid until 8 p.m. EDT for portions of southeast Alabama, the Florida panhandle, central and southwestern Georgia and western South Carolina. This watch area includes Panama City, Florida, Columbus, Georgia, Macon, Georgia, Augusta, Georgia, and Columbia, South Carolina.
A tornado watch valid until 9 p.m. CDT (10 p.m. EDT) for parts of northern and east-central Alabama, northwest Georgia, southeast Indiana, central Kentucky and middle Tennessee. This watch area includes Atlanta, Louisville, Kentucky, Nashville, Tennessee, and Birmingham, Alabama.
A tornado watch valid until 8 p.m. EDT for portions of southern North Carolina and northeast South Carolina. This watch area includes Lumberton, North Carolina, and Myrtle Beach, South Carolina.
A severe thunderstorm watch valid until 9 p.m. EDT for parts of southeast Illinois, southern and central Indiana, northern Kentucky and southwest Ohio. This watch area includes Indianapolis, Cincinnati and Dayton, Ohio.
Even as tornado watches are dropped for a certain location, stay weather aware throughout the evening. Multiple waves of severe weather are expected.

Just before 1 p.m. EDT, a large and possibly long-track tornado was observed southeast of Columbus, Georgia, near Weston, moving east, and this storm was likely still producing a tornado as of 2:30 p.m. EDT north of Cordele. Damage to structures was reported in Weston and Benevolence, Georgia.

At the Columbia Metropolitan Airport in South Carolina, a wind gust of 68 mph was measured just before 2:30 p.m. EDT. Near Monetta, South Carolina, a tornado was reported and several trees were downed.  

Hail up to 2.5 inches in diameter – just smaller than a baseball – was observed in Camden, Alabama, around 9 a.m. CDT Wednesday and near Clayton, Alabama, just before 2:30 a.m. CDT. 

Lightning was reported to have injured three people in Navarre, Florida, Wednesday afternoon, and there were also several reports of house fires in the Atlanta area Wednesday morning.

(MORE: Latest Damage, News)

Tuesday night, buildings were damaged, trees were uprooted and power lines were downed in Goodman, Missouri, from what was at least an EF2 tornado. The emergency manager reported damage to the fire station and elementary school in this southwest Missouri city about 40 miles south-southeast of Joplin.

Now, that same weather system is pushing east interacting with warm and increasingly humid air, sparking a 24- to 36-hour outbreak of severe thunderstorms from the Southeast and Ohio Valley to the East Coast into at least midday Thursday.

(MORE: April's Tornadic, Dangerous Reputation)

Severe Outlook

Into Wednesday Night

An outbreak of severe thunderstorms will continue marching east ahead of the cold front from the Ohio Valley and Appalachians to north Florida.
Some tornadoes are still possible, both embedded in the squall line and in discrete thunderstorms ahead of the line.
Otherwise, damaging straight-line winds are the main nighttime concern.
Localized flash flooding may become a concern, particularly in the Appalachians.
FORECAST: Charlotte | Savannah, Georgia | Jacksonville

Wednesday Night's Thunderstorm Forecast
Areas in red have the highest chance of severe thunderstorms. Areas in orange are expected to see thunderstorms, not necessarily reaching severe criteria.
Thursday

Severe storms are expected ahead of a strong cold front in the mid-Atlantic states, particularly in the morning.
Damaging wind gusts and a few tornadoes will be possible with this activity.
We can't rule out a few thunderstorms farther north, perhaps to the New York City tri-state area in the afternoon, potentially with hail and gusty winds.

Round 1 Recap: Sunday-Monday

Monday, April 3, Recap

Among almost 200 reports of severe weather on April 3, the NWS has confirmed 14 tornadoes in the Deep South. Given the number of possible tornadoes and ongoing severe weather, the NWS office in Peachtree City, Georgia, said storm surveys may take days, if not weeks.

One person died Monday afternoon when a mobile home was flipped by strong straight-line winds in Union County, South Carolina.

Another person was injured from a possible tornado near Ellaville, Georgia, when a tree fell onto a house. There were about 150 trees reported down, along with two overturned tractor-trailers, in Ellaville Monday afternoon.

Two people suffered minor injuries in Columbia County, Georgia, when straight-line winds overturned a dock they were standing on Monday afternoon. Several boats at Points West Marina were damaged by the strong winds.

A tornado may have touched down in Mansfield, Georgia, on Monday, causing damage in the downtown area. No injuries were reported from the possible twister.

Near Star Mills, Georgia, trees fell on cars along Interstate 75. Injuries were reported from this incident, but the exact number is unknown.

Here are some other storm reports received Monday, as reported to local National Weather Service offices:

Monroe County, Georgia: As many as 30 homes with damage, 9 major and one destroyed; one family was trapped but no injuries were reported
Griffin, Georgia: Several homes damaged with people trapped inside
Birmingham, Alabama: Intersection flooded with cars stranded
Luverne, Alabama: Roof ripped off a warehouse; numerous power poles and power lines downed
St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana: A pair of EF1 tornadoes from early Monday morning were confirmed by an NWS storm survey.
Flowood, Mississippi: Water rescues from an apartment complex
Near Brandon, Mississippi: Roughly 30 residents with water entering homes; two subdivisions with evacuations
Vicksburg, Mississippi: Mudslide across westbound lanes of Interstate 20
La Salle Parish, Louisiana: Numerous roads flooded, closed
Ward, Alabama: A tree fell on a car and injured one person.
Sunday, April 2, Recap

So far, the NWS has confirmed 17 tornadoes from April 2. Another pair of tornadoes near Center Point, Texas, and Ball, Louisiana, were sighted, but not confirmed.

Two people were killed by an EF1 tornado that destroyed their mobile home Sunday morning near Breaux Bridge, Louisiana, according to the St. Martin Parish Sheriff's Office. This tornado had maximum winds of 100 mph, according to the National Weather Service storm survey.

A tornado emergency was issued for Alexandria, Louisiana, Sunday afternoon as two reported tornadoes headed for the city. Property damage was reported, especially on the south side of the city. No injuries have been reported, according to the Alexandria Police Department.

One person was injured near Winnsboro, Louisiana, late Sunday afternoon when a tree fell onto their vehicle. There were at least 15 structures damaged in the area, including two that were destroyed. This may have been caused by a tornado, but the National Weather Service will conduct a storm survey to find out for sure.

Elsewhere, a brief tornado was reported Sunday morning well northwest of San Antonio in Center Point, Texas. Hail to the size of golf balls was observed near Buffalo, Texas, and Lafayette, Lousiana, saw hail the size of half dollars.

Sunday evening, thunderstorms stalled over parts of Louisiana and western Mississippi, leading to flash flooding in numerous locations, and at least two water rescues took place in Vicksburg, Mississippi, after 2.85 inches of rain fell in 48 minutes. In Pollock, Louisiana, some 40 percent of streets were flooded, according to the National Weather Service.

Early Sunday morning, the storms produced heavy rainfall in Del Rio, Texas, and multiple water rescues took place.