Adrian becomes earliest tropical storm on record in eastern Pacific

The official start of the eastern Pacific hurricane season is May 15, but the first tropical system of the year has already formed.
An area of showers and thunderstorms rapidly organized on Tuesday, becoming the earliest tropical depression and tropical storm on record in the eastern Pacific Ocean since reliable data began in 1966. The previous record for the earliest tropical depression was on May 12, 1990. This depression strengthened to Tropical Storm Alma on May 14.
“With water temperatures off western Central America above normal and relatively low wind shear, conditions will be conducive for further strengthening,” AccuWeather Meteorologist Steve Travis said.

As a result, Adrian is forecast to strengthen into a hurricane prior to threatening land.
While the storm is currently located well off the coast of Mexico and Central America and moving west-northwest, a northward turn is expected later this week.
This turn to the north will bring the strengthening cyclone closer to the coast of southern Mexico this weekend and early next week.
“The most likely area to endure significant impacts from this system extends from southern Mexico to Guatemala,” said AccuWeather senior Meteorologist Rob Miller.
Related: 
AccuWeather Hurricane Center 
Interactive eastern Pacific weather satellite 
6 ways to prepare now for hurricanes
The exact track and intensity of Adrian will determine the severity of the impacts, but flooding rain and mudslides are the most likely threats.
Damaging winds and an inundating storm surge are possible if Adrian tracks close enough to the coast early next week.
While the greatest threat is expected from eastern Oaxaca into southern Guatemala, tropical downpours may extend into northern Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Belize early next week.
The development of this tropical system is kicking off what AccuWeather Hurricane Expert Dan Kottlowski states will be “at least a normal to slightly above-normal season” in the eastern Pacific.
“This prediction does not include storms that will develop in the central Pacific Ocean, including in the Hawaii area," he explained.
An average season in the eastern Pacific Ocean yields 15 named tropical storms and eight hurricanes, four of which become major hurricanes.
“There are also one to two tropical impacts on the United States from the eastern Pacific during an average year,” Kottlowski said. “This would mainly be in the form of flooding rain affecting the region from Southern California to Texas."