Reports: Damaging tornadoes rip through south-central Georgia

A significant threat for severe weather will focus on the southeastern United States on Wednesday with damaging storms putting lives and property in danger.
Severe weather will continue into late Wednesday with storms capable of producing large hail, wind gusts of 60 to 70 mph, flooding downpours and tornadoes.
Thunderstorms will reach from the Gulf Coast into the Midwest with the most violent storms tracking across Alabama, Georgia, South Carolina and the Florida Panhandle.

Hail as large as baseballs has been measured near Talladega and Munford, Alabama as a severe thunderstorm moved over the area.
This thunderstorm is tracking east and may impact travel along I-20. Motorists along this stretch of highway may encounter blinding downpours that limit visibility to just a few hundred feet. 

A second area of severe thunderstorms is developing over Kentucky, Ohio, Indiana and southern Illinois. Several thunderstorms in this area have already produced hail larger than quarters with storms expected to become more widespread into Wednesday evening.
At 3:50 p.m. EDT Wednesday, a confirmed tornado was located near Lowery, Georgia and was tracking east toward Soperton. People in the path of this storm should seek shelter immediately. 

At 3:30 p.m. EDT Wednesday, several thunderstorms across southern Georgia were capable of producing tornadoes, including this severe thunderstorm near Eastman.

A severe thunderstorm located near Eastman, Georgia on Wednesday afternoon that was capable of producing a tornado. (Photo/Reed Timmer)

Storm damage has been reported in parts of southwestern Georgia, including in Clay and Quitman counties. At the University of Georgia in Athens, heavy rain triggered flooding around campus. 

At 2:02 PM ET Wednesday, a confirmed large & destructive tornado was located near Drayton, GA, moving east at 35 mph.

Damage to at least two structures has been reported in the town of Weston, Georgia, according to the local 911 center. One building had its roof blown off and the other structure collapsed.
In South Carolina a possible tornado is moving toward the town of Ridge Spring, which is located about 42 miles to the southwest of Columbia. 

At 12:32 p.m. EDT Wednesday, a confirmed large and destructive tornado was located 7 miles south of Lumpkin, Georgia. Residents in the area need to find shelter immediately. A tornado emergency has been declared for southern Stewart County and Webster County. 

The Clayton County Office of Emergency Management is urging residents to take cover as severe thunderstorms track near Jonesboro and Riverdale, Georgia, as of 12:30 p.m. EDT Wednesday. 

Severe storms have forced the postponement of play at the 2017 Masters in Augusta, Georgia. The golf tournament was scheduled to hold its final day of practice at Augusta National Golf Course. Play could resume once storms clear the area. 

Elsewhere, the Federal Aviation Administration has issued a ground stop for flights at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport. 


A possible tornado is reported to have caused extensive damage in Goodman, Missouri, late Tuesday night. Photos of the damage began to emerge on social media on Wednesday morning. Significant damage was reported to the town's fire station and elementary school, according to Fox 2 in St. Louis. 

At around 5:42 a.m. CDT, golf ball-sized hail was reported around DeArmanville, Alabama, according to an National Weather Service trained spotter. 

A severe thunderstorm warning has been issued south of Birmingham, Alabama, until 5 a.m. CDT on Wednesday. The storm is reportedly producing half dollar-sized hail.

Tennis ball-sized hail has been reported in Clayton, Alabama, at about 1:30 a.m. CDT Wednesday.
Three radar sites are currently out of service in the affected area, at Montgomery and Ft. Rucker, Alabama, and Moody Air Force Base, Georgia. This could possibly hamper storm warning abilities throughout the day.
Alabama Governor Robert Bentley declared a statewide State of Emergency on Tuesday in anticipation of Wednesday’s severe weather outbreak. This will allow state agencies to be prepared to carry out the state Emergency Operations Plan if it is needed.
School districts across the region are also preparing for severe thunderstorms with dozens of schools announcing that they will be closed or will have an early dismissal on Wednesday. This includes several colleges and universities.