Severe storms to threaten New York to Virginia into Monday night

For live reports on the storms in the Northeast, click here.
Damaging thunderstorms and torrential downpours will threaten part of the northeastern United States into Monday night.
The severe weather threat includes the possibility of a few isolated tornadoes.
A press of cooler air will clash with building warmth and humidity over the mid-Atlantic and interior Northeast to start the month of May.
The first storms began to target parts of eastern Ohio at midday with one storm producing a 70 mph wind gust in Canfield, Ohio, according to a National Weather Service trained spotter.
“Severe thunderstorms will move through portions of New York, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland and Virginia,” AccuWeather Storm Warning Meteorologist Joseph Bauer said.
The severe weather could extend as far north as southeastern Ontario.

These thunderstorms will then move eastward into the evening, surging into eastern Pennsylvania and central New York.
Wind gusts to 70 mph, local flash flooding and even a few tornadoes will be the concerns in this area, according to Bauer.
Tree damage is likely, along with sporadic power outages. Hail can also occur and cause damage to buildings or cars.
“The threat will be greatest along the Interstate 79 and I-81 corridors,” AccuWeather Senior Meteorologist Kristina Pydynowski said.
Locally severe thunderstorms will stretch as far south as the Carolinas, Georgia and northern Florida.
Cities at risk for the violent thunderstorms include Morgantown and Martinsburg, West Virginia; Hagerstown, Maryland; Harrisonburg and Roanoke, Virginia; Pittsburgh, State College, Scranton and Harrisburg, Pennsylvania; and Buffalo, Syracuse and Binghamton, New York.
RELATED: 
Photos: Central, southern US communities face devastating aftermath of deadly tornadoes, flooding 
Preparing for the costliest weather disaster in the US: How to stay safe before, during and after a flood 
2017 US summer forecast: Early storms to hold back heat in Northeast; Wildfires to rage in California
Residents who are enjoying the warmth and sunshine prior to the thunderstorms by taking part in warm weather activities should be prepared to seek shelter indoors at the first sight of lightning or clap of thunder.
The greatest severe hazards are expected to diminish as the thunderstorms approach the I-95 corridor from Washington, D.C., to New York City on Monday night. A heavy burst of rain and rumbles of thunder may rudely awaken residents along this swath.
“The passage of this front will slash highs by 10 to 20 degrees Fahrenheit around the eastern Great Lakes for Tuesday,” Pydynowski said.
Blustery conditions will accompany the cooler air, with winds gusting past 30 mph at times. Wind gusts whipping as high as 60 mph are possible over the Appalachians.
Further cooling will take place at midweek to the mid-Atlantic and New England coasts.
Umbrellas and rain jackets will be needed into late week, as a storm rides up the Eastern Seaboard and delivers a thorough soaking on Thursday and Friday.