Weekly wrap-up: Dangerous flooding engulfs eastern North Carolina; March for Science draws thousands to rainy DC


Intense rainfall led to flooding in parts of the Carolinas this week. North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper said the rain was "like we haven’t seen since Hurricane Matthew."
Road closures and water rescues were reported in eastern portions of the state on Tuesday. Raleigh recorded 4.51 inches of rain on Monday alone, making it the wettest April day in the city's history.
In Elkin, North Carolina, the Yadkin River approached moderate flood stage after rising from nearly 5 feet to 20 feet from Sunday night into Monday. Moderate to major flooding will persist along area rivers into next week in some locations.

amesha Merritt clings onto a flooded vehicle in Raleigh, N.C., Tuesday, April 25, 2017. (AP Photo/Gerry Broome)

Severe storms swept across the central and southern U.S. later on this week, washing out roadways and pelting some areas with hail as large as a baseball.
Damaging winds gusting as high as 70 mph blew across parts of Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas and Mississippi. Baseball-sized hail was reported in parts of Mississippi late Wednesday night.
Flash flooding was reported in Yazoo City, Mississippi. A family had to be rescued from their car after trying to drive under a low-hanging railroad trestle, according to the emergency manager.
RELATED: 
'Why I March:' March for Science protestors share what drove them to rally in DC 
How one company in Africa turns ocean pollution into colorful artwork 
2017 US summer forecast: Early storms to hold back heat in Northeast; Wildfires to rage in California
Protesters took to a rainy Washington, D.C., on Saturday, April 22, voicing support for public funding of scientific research and how it's implemented into public policy. Tens of thousands attended.
The day-long celebration of science was organized by the Earth Day Network, meant to encourage policy-makers to use scientific evidence to craft legislation. It was hosted by musician Questlove and YouTube personality Derek Muller.
"The March for Science is a celebration of science. It's not only about scientists and politicians," the march's website read. "It is about the very real role that science plays in each of our lives."

People march past the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency during the March For Science in Washington, Saturday, April 22, 2017. (AP Photo/Sait Serkan Gurbuz)

Record rain fell in parts of northeastern India and neighboring Bangladesh. Silchar recorded more than 100 mm (4 inches) within a 24-hour period on Tuesday, marking the highest April 24-hour rainfall in decades. Locations in Bangladesh have received 250-500 mm (10-20 inches) of rain over the past week alone.
An unusual snow fell in Munich and parts of southern Germany this week. Snow coated Munich and surrounding areas, a far departure from the normal conditions of 60 F (15 C) for this time of year.
The German Weather Service recorded temperatures as low as zero degrees Celsius and heavy snowfall around Munich and southern Allgau, according to the Associate Press. 