Avengers 3 Directors Explain Durham Cathedral Filming Location

The Russo brothers have been waxing lyrical about their shoot at the famous Durham Cathedral and have at least confirmed one thing the location won’t be in Avengers: Infinity War. Marvel Studios may still be riding high on the initial success of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 but the excitement for the next Avengers installment is already palpable, thanks to both the prospect of the vast majority of the Marvel Cinematic Universe teaming up and the fact that the movie will finally deal with Thanos, the major villain first teased way back in 2012.

A few months ago, it was reported that the Avengers: Infinity War production was heading to Scotland for some on-location filming. More recently, it transpired that shoots were taking place a little further south at England’s famous Durham Cathedral, a building also used for a selection of Hogwarts scenes in the Harry Potter movies.

Anthony and Joe Russo, the duo tasked with directing the next Avengers offering, have now taken some time out of their schedule to speak with press in Durham and have revealed some minor nuggets of information in the process. According to the Sunderland Echo, the directorial duo confirmed that Durham cathedral would not be appearing as a cathedral in the movie. The Russos also claimed that the location would appear in “several scenes” and claimed that the shoot had attracted plenty of fan interest, with the crew sending Thor’s hammer out to the crowds to keep them entertained. Presumably, no one could pick it up.

Although many fans would’ve predicted Durham cathedral would be used as a stand-in for a more fantastical location rather than merely ‘a big church’, the confirmation does at least rule out several possibilities. Firstly, the scenes there won’t be taking place in a ‘real world’ setting, as was the case in the climax of Thor: The Dark World, where scenes were shot at the University of Greenwich and later appeared in the movie as its own landmark.

So if it isn’t a cathedral, what exactly could Durham cathedral be representing in Avengers: Infinity War? The building’s decadent halls and historic aesthetic would lend it well to an Asgardian setting and there have been several reports to suggest that Thor’s home planet will be a key factor in the forthcoming battle against Thanos.

With that said, it’s also possible that the location will be the setting for a huge battle between Thanos and the assembled heroes. The Durham set has not only been graced by the likes of Robert Downey Jr. and Chris Hemsworth – a.k.a. Iron Man and Thor – but a number of Guardians of the Galaxy members have also been spotted, including Rocket Racoon. Could the presence of both the Avengers and the Guardians indicate the site of a key battle or perhaps even the meeting location for the two heroic groups?