Alien: Covenant Sequel May Not Be Titled Awakening

As fans of the highly anticipated Ridley Scott directed science-fiction franchise film Alien: Covenant continue to await that film’s theatrical release later this month, the latest word has it that its sequel may not be titled Awakening as previously reported. For those in the know, Scott is currently working on several subsequent installments in the Alien franchise, and generally positive early reviews of Covenant are sure to encourage the celebrated filmmaker as he continues to make plans for future installments in the long-running series.

Scott certainly seems prepared to keep his much beloved science-fiction property afloat for the foreseeable future, and with the release of Alien: Covenant fans will be able to determine for themselves whether or not the franchise is headed in the right direction. Featuring several returning characters from Prometheus to boot, die-hard Alien fanatics and general moviegoers alike are sure to be in for quite the ride – though the next entry in the series may be getting a new title.

During a recent conversation with the director at IGN, Scott spoke to the future of the franchise following the release of Alien: Covenant, making it clear that he is currently working on the script for another sequel that he plans to being filming within the next fourteen months. In addition, Scott further commented on the now defunct Alien 5 project created by Neill Blomkamp – which was apparently slated to be titled Awakening. Setting the record straight, Scott explained:

“They wanted to do Alien, er, Awakening – Neill Blomkamp. I said fine. I was going to be the producer. If I could have, I would have. Except I do question – why have both [Blomkamp’s Alien and Scott’s Alien] out there? It seems like shooting your big toe off – it doesn’t make sense. But they didn’t go forward with it, Fox, so I just kind of kept out of it. I mean, I’d literally ignited this thing to bring it off the ground again, because it was lying there dormant on a shelf. I had this thing to bring it back up – but here we are.”

Viewers who might have liked to see Blomkamp – most famous for his 2009 directorial debut District 9 – take a turn at the Alien franchise may be taken aback by Scott’s curt dismissal of the canned project. Furthermore, Awakening can now potentially be put to bed as the title of Scott’s sequel to Alien: Covenant.

Until more information comes to light, it would appear that Alien: Covenant may not be followed by a movie called Awakening after all. On that note, here’s to hoping for the very best from Scott and company as things continue to develop behind the scenes of the forthcoming franchise production.