Deadpool 2 Reportedly Casting Three X-Force Characters

Fox is betting big with Deadpool’s future and are reportedly planning to introduce three more X-Force members in Deadpool 2. Fans have known since last year that, eventually, Fox would be bringing the X-Force team into their movie universe and have given the Deadpool franchise the responsibility of making that happen. Since then, it has come out that Cable and Domino will have prominent roles setting up their futures in X-Force, and have already cast Josh Brolin and Zazie Beetz, respectively.

This decision has elevated what was a relatively intimate film in Deadpool to now being more along the lines of an ensemble piece. As if introducing these two mutants, bringing back others, and adding other new mystery characters wasn’t a tall enough task, it has now been revealed that three future X-Force members will debut in Deadpool 2 as well.

ComicBook is reporting that Fox is planning on using the ending of Deadpool 2 to heavily set up X-Force and will do so in the form of a post-credits scene. According to their sources, this post-credits scene will introduce Sunspot, Feral, and Shatterstar into the universe. The plan is for each to then star alongside Deadpool, Cable, and Domino in X-Force, but this idea will require them to cast the future stars in the coming months.

In the comics, each of the three characters have served as members of the X-Force over the years. Each can be seen above with Shatterstar having the long orange ponytail, Sunspot sporting the red visor, and Feral appearing right below. For those that are fans of the X-Men films, they may remember Sunspot appearing in previous movies, which will surely be retconned with this latest incarnation. His real name is Roberto DeCosta, and as his superhero name implies, he can absorb solar energy to fly and more.

Shatterstar’s real name is Gaveedra Seven and is the son of other X-Men heroes Dazzler and Longshot. He has a variety of superhuman abilities, but is unique thanks to his hollow bones that allow him to be lighter. Feral’s real name is Maria Callasantos and as her look would imply, has many characters of feline creatures. Claws, fangs, agility, speed, and healing are at her disposal.

With each of these characters set to play such a minor role in Deadpool 2, it could be awhile before casting is announced and with Fox’s out of the box thinking, there is no telling who could end up in these roles. Fox could go old or young for any or all of these roles, but casting aside, this continues to show that Fox has some semblance of a larger plan and moves like these reinforce it. Now that they have multiple future films announced and plans for many more, it will undoubtedly be interesting to see how these plans fall into place.