Spider-Man: Homecoming - What We Know So Far
BY ERIC EISENBERG
52 COMMENTS
After five Sony movies that featured two different Peter Parkers (in Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield), Spider-Man is now in the hands of Marvel Studios, and is ready to make a major impact on the future of the Marvel Cinematic Universe. The webslinging hero made his tremendously exciting franchise debut in Captain America: Civil War, but now he's ready to be the star of his first MCU solo movie in the form of Spider-Man: Homecoming.

Because of the excitement that the project has generated, we have been getting regular updates about the development of the film since the day it was officially announced -- and as a result there is quite a bit to know going in. For your convenience, we've put together this handy What We Know So Far guide, that we will keep updated as Spider-Man: Homecoming edges closer and closer to release. Who is making the blockbuster? Who is starring in it? What will it be about? For all the answers you seek, read on!

What Is The Spider-Man: Homecoming Release Date?
It originally looked like 2017 was going to be a typical year for the Marvel Cinematic Universe, with two new movies hitting theaters (Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 and Thor: Ragnarok), but the deal between Marvel Studios and Sony Pictures means that 2017 will be the first year that we get three MCU titles in one calendar year. It was originally announced that the movie would be coming out on July 28, 2017, but now Spider-Man: Homecoming will officially be swinging into theaters on July 7, 2017.

What Is Spider-Man: Homecoming Rated?
The official decisions about a film's rating aren't made until said film has assembled something resembling a theatrical cut -- so it will be a little while before we get any official word about Spider-Man: Homecoming from the MPAA. That being said, Walt Disney Company CEO Bob Iger has said that there are no plans for Marvel Studios to start making R-rated superhero movies, so we can expect that the blockbuster will be categorized as PG-13.

It has made sense for all of Marvel's movies to be PG-13 thus far, but it makes a great deal of sense in particular for Spider-Man: Homecoming. Not only is the hero easily one of the most optimistic and brightest stars from Marvel comics, but he himself will also be portrayed as a sophomore-aged teenager for the first time. It wouldn't make any kind of sense for the movie about the world's most popular teen superhero to be inaccessible to teens.

When Is Spider-Man: Homecoming Set?
Thankfully, Marvel Studios knows that audiences really, really don't want to see another version of Spider-Man's origin story, so they're skipping over that part entirely. When we meet Peter Parker in Captain America: Civil War, he mentions that he has had his powers for about six months -- and video played by Tony Stark reveals that he has already been donning a costume and using web-shooters to help people and stop crime in New York City. That and the events at the Leipzig-Halle airport helps give us a sense of how much experience the hero will have going into Spider-Man: Homecoming, but what remains unclear is exactly when the blockbuster will be set.

It's pretty typical for Marvel movies to use real time to establish the temporal distance between their different projects, but it's unclear if they'll be able to do that with the Spider-Man films. After all, one of the most important elements of this big screen incarnation is the fact that he's a young, high school-aged kid, and if Marvel wants to not have him graduating in 2020 then they will have to slow things down a bit when it comes to the passage of time. As a result, it's probable that the happenings in Spider-Man: Homecoming will take place a few months or weeks (if not days) after the events of Captain America: Civil War, rather than a full year.

What Is Spider-Man: Homecoming About?
Marvel Studios and Sony Pictures haven't exactly released an official plot description for Spider-Man: Homecoming, but various interviews with cast members and filmmakers have revealed key bits of information. As mentioned earlier, one of the key parts of this version of Spider-Man is his youth, and the script by John Francis Daley and Jonathan M. Goldstein will be taking full advantage of that. The film has been described as a John Hughes-inspired coming of age movie, and the footage shown at San Diego Comic-Con 2016 suggests that a good portion of the film will be set within the walls of Midtown High School.

We know that Spider-Man: Homecoming will deal with a teenage Peter Parker figuring out how to juggle his home life, and social life, while also being a new superhero. If we can take anything away from the title, we also fully expect a sequence where Parker is racing across town on a series of webs while trying to make it in time for the school dance.

Who Is Directing Spider-Man: Homecoming?
Jon Watts isn't exactly a household name just yet, but he has been selected by Marvel Studios as the man they want to make the first Spider-Man movie set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Of course, just because you don't know his name doesn't mean he doesn't have any experience. He made his feature directorial debut with the horror flick Clown, but what really got him noticed was his 2015 film Cop Car. Telling the story of a couple of kids who make the mistake of stealing the vehicle of a corrupt sheriff (Kevin Bacon), the film is an excellent, dark drama with wonderful bits of comedy -- and it's entirely possible that it was the great performance by the two young leads helped inspire Marvel to hire Watts for Spider-Man: Homecoming.

Peter Parker/Spider-Man (Tom Holland)
Tom Holland is surely the envy of every young actor in Hollywood right now. After a long and grueling casting process, he was ultimately selected as the star who will portray Peter Parker/Spider-Man in the Marvel Cinematic Universe for many, many years to come. Prior to landing this gig, the young Brit actor was best known for playing Naomi Watts and Ewan McGregor's brave son in the tsunami thriller The Impossible. He also starred alongside fellow MCU superstar Chris Hemsworth in Ron Howard's In The Heart of the Sea (Hemsworth even takes some credit for pushing Holland in front of the Marvel executives during the casting process).

But what do we know about this new incarnation of Peter Parker/Spider-Man? As mentioned earlier, in Captain America: Civil War we learned that Peter has had his Spidey powers for six months, and that he has been using them to prevent crimes around his neighborhood. Peter made his own costume, complete with special lenses that would help him focus his senses, and developed the formula for his webbing (which impressed the hell out of Tony Stark). We don't know if he has faced down any super villains just yet, but that's an answer Spider-Man: Homecoming will surely provide.

As for his home life, Peter lives in an apartment in Queens, New York with his Aunt May, and while he's not mentioned by name in Captain America: Civil War, it's pretty clear that the death of his Uncle Ben has left him feeling the need to be responsible with his great power. Peter likes to collect old technology (he's not hesitant about dumpster diving), and he presumably uses the components to build inventions of his own -- inventions that will surely help in his future as a superhero.