Asians, Blacks, Hispanics Have More Heart Disease Risks at Normal Weight: Study

People of Hispanic, African-American, and Asian descent could be at high risk for factors related to heart disease even if they are not overweight or obese, according to the lead author of a new study.

The research, published this week in the Annals of Internal Medicine, found that among people of normal weight, South Asians were twice as likely as whites to have risk factors for heart disease.

That likelihood was 80 percent greater for Hispanics and 50 percent for blacks and people of Chinese descent, the research found.

"One of the messages of the paper is that in using overweight and obesity as the main criteria, clinicians are likely to miss a large number of people, especially in race-ethnic minority populations, that are at high risk but are normal weight," Unjali Gujral, a postdoctoral fellow with the Emory Global Diabetes Research Center and the study's lead author, told NBC News by phone Tuesday.

Body mass index (BMI), a height-to-weight ratio, is used to determine whether someone is overweight or obese. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, an independent group of health experts, recommends that doctors use this ratio as the main criteria to screen for risk factors associated with heart disease and diabetes, according to the study.

Those factors include low HDL (often called good cholesterol); elevated triglycerides (fat found in blood); elevated glucose (blood sugar); and high blood pressure, the study said.

The presence of at least two translates to a higher risk of having heart disease, diabetes, or stroke.

But a BMI number by itself may not be a one-size-fits-all standard for deciding whether to check for heart disease risks, the study suggests.

defines normal BMI as 18.5 to 24.9; overweight as 25.0 to 29.9; and obese as 30 and over.

The ranges differ slightly for South Asians and Chinese, two groups where heart disease and diabetes are known to occur at lower BMIs. For them, normal runs from 18.5 to 22.9; overweight from 23.0 to 27.4; and obese, 27.5 and higher.

The study estimated the necessary BMI for each race and ethnic group that would be equal to the same number of heart health risk factors as someone who is white with a 25.0 BMI, the low end of overweight, Gujral said.