Green Day, Florida Georgia Line, Fifth Harmony & More for 'Good Morning America' 2017 Summer Concert Series

Fifth Harmony
The lineup for Good Morning America's 2017 Summer Concert Series reads like the lineup for the ultimate music festival. The 17-week series that takes place live from the SummerStage in New York's Central Park will kick off on May 19 with Green Day performing songs from their latest, Revolution Radio, and stretch out through September with appearances from Florida George Line, Fifth Harmony, The Chainsmokers, The Lumineers, Little Big Town, Bebe Rexha, Big Sean, Lady Antebellum and many others.

All the concerts are free and open to the public and will take place at Rumsey Playfield in Central Park on Fridays from 7-9 a.m. ET.

Check out the full lineup below:

May 19 – Green Day (#GreenDayOnGMA)

May 26 – Florida Georgia Line & Nelly (#FGLonGMA and #NellyOnGMA)

June 2 – Fifth Harmony (#5HOnGMA)

June 9 – The Chainsmokers* (#ChainsmokersOnGMA)

June 16 – The Lumineers (#LumineersOnGMA)

June 23 – Little Big Town (#LittleBigTownOnGMA)

June 30 – Bebe Rexha* (#BebeOnGMA)

July 7 – Big Sean (#BigSeanOnGMA)

July 14 – Lady Antebellum (#LadyAOnGMA)

July 21 – Zedd featuring Alessia Cara (#ZeddOnGMA and #AlessiaOnGMA)

July 28 – Imagine Dragons (#ImagineDragonsOnGMA)

August 4 – Linkin Park (#LinkinParkOnGMA)

August 11 – Bleachers (#BleachersOnGMA)

August 18 – Eric Church (#EricChurchOnGMA)

August 25 – Paramore (#ParamoreOnGMA)

September 1 – Jason Derulo (#DeruloOnGMA)

Date TBD – Dierks Bentley*

(*The Chainsmokers will require advanced tickets for entry; tickets will be available closer to the show date. Bebe Rexha will perform in GMA's Times Square studio and the Bentley show information will be announced later.)
Harry Styles: Behind the Album' Documentary Coming to Apple Music May 15
Three days after Harry Styles fans hear his highly anticipated debut solo album, they'll get a deeper look into how the album all came together. Apple Music has all the behind-the-scenes footage Stylers could want in a documentary titled Harry Styles: Behind the Album, premiering May 15.

In addition to clips from Styles recording in the studio, the film will also feature an exclusive interview with Styles himself as well as live footage of Harry's band performing his album songs for the first time together at Abbey Road. A trailer for the doc shows Styles singing, scuba diving, and yes, even getting his famous locks chopped -- oh, and according to a press release, fans will also get to see Mr. Styles in his underwear.

"I kinda wanted to see if I could write something people liked without knowing everything about me," Styles says of the album in the trailer. "Anytime you’re doing anything different, it’s a bit scary."

Check out the 30-second teaser of Harry Styles: Behind the Album, which will be available only on Apple Music May 15.

Liam Payne Poses Shirtless for 'Rollacoaster' Magazine, Talks Trump Kicking 1D Out of Hotel

Harry's not the only one who leaves his shirt on the floor for photo shoots. Fellow former One Direction bandmate Liam Payne also dropped top for a cover story in Rollacoaster magazine, in which the 23-year-old talked about his one weird encounter with President Trump, and his dad's reaction when 1D crashed and burned in the X Factor finals years ago.

The Trump story -- which, surprisingly, the President has not tweeted about to date -- is the long-whispered-about story of him kicking the band out of one of his hotels.  "You wouldn’t believe it," Payne attests. "It was about [meeting] his daughter. He phoned up our manager and we were asleep. He said, ‘Well, wake them up,’ and I was like, ‘no,’ and then he wouldn’t let us use the underground garage. Obviously in New York we can’t really go outside. New York is ruthless for us. So he was like, ‘OK, then I don’t want you in my hotel.’ So we had to leave."

In the magazine cover story, "No Payne, No Gain" -- which hits newsstands on June 8 -- Payne also discusses how he turned to his dad and made a "we made it this far" face when the then-new group came in third in 2010 behind Rebecca Ferguson and Matt Cardle on The X Factor. His bandmates were in "pieces," he says, with first Harry, then Louis, then Niall and finally Zayn bursting into tears. 

"A cameraman came over and said ‘can I get you boys for an interview?’ and I looked at all the boys crying, in their mums' arms and I was like, ‘Look, I’ll do the interview,’ because I was the only one who was all right, and so I went off to the side and did the after-camera interview for us," he recalls. "I just left them because I wanted them to have their moment and the cameras didn’t need to see them like that."

Liam also has high praise for his girlfriend, singer Cheryl Cole, saying he's living his "dream life" now and there really are no complaints. "In a non-cliché way, it’s weird waking up every day and literally living out your dream. You wake up in the most beautiful places. Obviously I have the most beautiful girlfriend in the whole world and she’s absolutely amazing," he he raves. "She’s been my dream girl since I was younger. She’s so ace."

"She is a wonderful, wonderful person and it’s amazing to have someone who can relate to so much of things, someone who’s taken greater steps than me," he continues. "Her solo career was amazing. She’s been in the industry for 14 years now. She fully supports me. We’re super happy. It’s a very personal, precious time for us."

There's much more going coming up for Payne as well, with a Migos collaboration expected to drop any day now. The rap trio's Quavo announced the news during an interview with UK radio personality Tim Westwood recently, saying, "I just came from a video today. My boy Liam from One Direction. We just shot that. Crazy vid. Crazy visuals. Crazy team. Cool guy, nice guy. It’s goin’ up."

Harry Styles Stuns During Citi Concert Series on 'TODAY': Live Recap

When Harry Styles stepped on the stage set up at Rockefeller Plaza Tuesday morning (May 9), dressed in a black shirt and richly colored pink suit (that Matt Lauer said he was jealous of), it was pure pandemonium -- some fans had been waiting for days for this moment.

"Our line started to form on Saturday afternoon," Alex Ficquette, TODAY's plaza producer, tells Billboard. "They were in sleeping bags, the line hit six city blocks this morning. I haven't seen it this crazy since Justin Bieber last year."

Styles was not only kicking off the Citi Concert Series on TODAY's summer lineup, but also delivering his second-ever live performance (his first being on Saturday Night Live weeks prior). During his SNL performance, he debuted the track "Ever Since New York," and though the song has yet to see an official release, that didn't prevent the young, primarily female, crowd from singing every lyric.

This morning, Styles performed that track again as well as his hit "Sign of the Times" (he released the music video yesterday), and also debuted a new song: the bluesy, rock-driven "Carolina" that features a catchy chorus of "la la la's" while Styles repeatedly sings, "She's a good girl."

There's a distinct energy here of people who are excited to hear the solo material," Ficquette says. That didn't stop Styles from dipping his toes into an old One Direction song, though.

Before leaving the stage -- it was specially built to be in the middle and lower to the ground than TODAY's normal stage, "so he could be completely surrounded by his fans, he wanted that," says Ficquette -- Styles had one final surprise. "I've never performed this before," he said with his signature smirk. "Let's see how it goes. I wrote this four years ago." He then led fans through a sing-along of "Stockholm Syndrome," off the 2014 1D album Four.

As Styles sang his opening verse, he brought new meaning to the lyrical question, "Who’s this whisper telling me that I’m never gonna get away?" Considering that on the chorus of "Sign of the Times" he sings over and over again, "We got to get away," it's clear Styles isn't done chasing whatever he's after... but following the stunning solo performance he delivered on TODAY, he appears to be headed in the right direction.

 