Share your horror stories to help end ticket rip-offs

Consumer group Which? launches a worldwide survey into secondary resale sites and urges any victims to take part
Music, theatre and sports fans are being asked to share horror stories about controversial ticket resale sites as part of a campaign by consumer group Which?

So-called “secondary” ticket websites, such as StubHub, Get Me In! and Viagogo, provide a platform for people with tickets to sell them on, often at a vast mark-up. These secondary sites have come under scrutiny amid concern that they are dominated by professional touts and rip off genuine fans.

Which? will this week launch a consumer survey inviting fans to contribute to a worldwide investigation into the industry via its website. The campaign follows a series of high-profile examples of fans being overcharged, refused entry at the door, or ending up with seats that were far worse than those they had paid for.

Families with children waiting to see the Harry Potter and the Cursed Child play, which secondary sites including Viagogo were advertising for more than £8,000, were among those refused entry earlier this year.

Black Sabbath fans might be a hardier lot than devotees of the schoolboy wizard, but around 200 were left equally disappointed at being refused entry at the O2 arena.

Ed Sheeran fan Claire Turnham set up a Facebook group, Victim of Viagogo, after realising she was just one of many who had been overcharged, sometimes to the tune of thousands of pounds, due to what the company described as a “glitch”. She has ended up devoting hours, for no pay, to help secure £55,000 in refunds for cash-strapped group members, but says many are still waiting for their money back.

Music industry group FanFair Alliance, which has published a ticket-buying guide, said consumers resort to these sites partly due to confusion about the difference between them and primary sites, where tickets are officially released. Some resale platforms muddy the waters by paying Google to appear at the top of search results, the group said. “For the most sought-after events you will inevitably see unauthorised resale sites at the top of Google, above the authorised ticket sellers,” says FanFair Alliance. “It’s deceptive and confusing.”

The group also warned fans that they may be unwittingly funding professional touts, who are able to grab hundreds of tickets on primary sites, ensuring true fans miss out. “The biggest myth is that these are fan-to-fan services. At the most high-demand events the vast majority of tickets appear to be predominantly listed by professional touts,” says FanFair Alliance.

In one example revealed by the Guardian earlier this year, dozens of tickets for major acts were being sold on Seatwave by Michael Mayiger, who was convicted of a £2m ticket fraud in 2012. Consumers would have been totally unaware of this because he was able to disguise his identity by using a nondescript company name.
The Competition and Markets Authority is in the midst of an investigation into whether secondary sites are providing sufficient details about sellers, as well as information about where seats are located and what they cost.

The government has also moved to address problems faced by consumers in the digital economy bill, which was passed last month. Measures include the outlawing of “bots” – software used by some touts to grab primary tickets at the expense of fans – and a requirement for resale sites to provide a unique booking reference and ticket number. The aim is to crack down on fraudulent tickets and help artists and promoters spot the activity of hardcore touts.

But Which? believes there is still work to do. “Time and time again, people are unable to get tickets to events through primary ticketing sites and are, instead, left with no choice but to resort to secondary sites, where they may struggle to find the basic information about the tickets being resold,” says Alex Neill, Which? managing director of home products and services.

“We want to hear people’s experiences of using secondary ticketing sites to help identify what more needs to be done to make things work better for consumers.”

Missing out on a dream
Lucy Lovell had no idea what the difference was between primary and secondary tickets when she decided to treat her rugby-mad family to see England v Italy at Twickenham in the Six Nations tournament.

These tickets are notoriously difficult to get, but the 46-year-old business manager found some advertised on StubHub and decided to buy three for herself, her husband and son Tom, 11.

They were advertised for £250 each, adding up to £900 including fees, despite commanding a face value of just £60 each. “I’d had a bonus from work and although I knew it was expensive, I thought I’d treat the family,” says Lucy. “I wanted a once-in-a-lifetime experience. They took my money, so I thought ‘job done’.”

But two months after she paid – and just three weeks before the big day – StubHub emailed to say the seller was “unable to complete the sale”. Instead, the family was offered tickets 25 rows from the pitch for a 3% discount. “We decided not to go and did get a full refund, but we missed out on the dream. It was a dire, dire experience. You’re not buying a ticket, you’re buying a potential ticket.”

StubHub says it was the “responsibility of the seller to ensure it updates its listing if their ticket is no longer available”, and highlighted its FanProtectGuarantee.