Oil & Gas Stock Roundup: ConocoPhillips' $13.3B Asset Sale, Exxon's Guyana Oil Find and More

It was a week where oil prices reclaimed the $50-a-barrel level, while natural gas futures climbed to a 2-month high. 

On the news front, one of the world's largest independent oil producer ConocoPhillips COP agreed to sell most of its Canadian assets to Calgary-based Cenovus Energy Inc. CVE in a $13.3 billion deal, while supermajor ExxonMobil Corp. XOM confirmed its third oil discovery off the coast of Guyana.

Overall, the sector ended the first quarter on a positive note. West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures added 5.5% to close at $50.60 per barrel, while natural gas prices rose 1.2% to $3.19 per million Btu (MMBtu). (See the last ‘Oil & Gas Stock Roundup’ here: TransCanada's Keystone Approval, Chevron's Asset Sale and More.)

Scoring its second gain in 3 weeks, oil prices rallied to their highest level since early March. The commodity was supported by U.S. government data that showed larger-then-anticipated declines in petroleum-product inventories and an uptick in refinery activity – a proxy for stronger crude demand. Prices were further supported by increasing prospects of the OPEC-led cartel extending its production cut agreement by six months.

Oils-Energy Sector 5YR % Return

Oils-Energy Sector 5YR % Return

Meanwhile, natural gas also turned higher following an in-line decrease in weekly supplies and predictions of strong demand on the back of a late-winter cold blast.

Recap of the Week’s Most Important Stories

1.    Upstream energy company ConocoPhillips recently announced its decision to divest a huge chunk of its Canadian properties to Calgary, Alberta-based Cenovus Energy Inc.for around $13.3 billion. The transaction is anticipated to close by second-quarter 2017.

Under the accord, the company would divest its 50% non-operated stake in the Foster Creek Christina Lake oil sands partnership and also the bulk of its western Canada Deep Basin gas properties. The company primarily aims to lower exposure to those assets as the cost of operation in these properties is high.

This apart, ConocoPhillips plans use the sale proceeds to reduce its debt burden to $20 billion. Also, it intends to return money to investors by repurchasing shares. It is to be noted that ConocoPhillips is likely to buy back $3 billion shares in 2017. Another $3 billion stock repurchase would be executed through 2018 and 2019. (Read more: Here's Why ConocoPhillips Will Sell $13.3B Canadian Assets.)

2.    World’s largest publicly listed energy producer ExxonMobil Corp. announced a promising deepwater oil find on the prolific Stabroek Block at Snoek well, located offshore Guyana. This marks the company’s third such discovery on the Stabroek Block, after Liza and Payara discoveries.

The 82 feet, high quality oil bearing sandstone reservoir – Snoek well – was drilled by ExxonMobil affiliate Esso Exploration and Production Guyana Ltd using Stena Carron drillship. Post the completion of the drilling of Snoek well, Stena Carron drillship has resumed boring the Liza-4 well.

Esso Exploration and Production is responsible for all ExxonMobil’s drilling projects in the Guyanese waters, including its previous discoveries at Liza and Payara. Esso Exploration and Production Guyana is the chief operator of the Stabroek Block owning 45% of the stake. Hess Guyana Exploration Ltd. and CNOOC Nexen Petroleum Guyana Ltd. hold 30% and 25% interests respectively. (Read more: ExxonMobil Announces Major Oil Discovery Offshore Guyana.)