11 of the most controversial fast food adverts of all time
Labour politicians are calling for an end to fast food advertising on British television before the watershed. In a bid to tackle childhood obesity, the party has stated that products that are high in fat, salt and sugar should be banned not only during children's programming but also in the evenings, during shows such as The X Factor and Britain's Got Talent that attract a younger audience. 

Questionable nutritional standards aside, fast food firms have a history of producing outlandish, eyebrow-raising advertising. Here are 11 of the weirdest and most controversial campaigns. 

1. When McDonalds compared women to French fries 

Fast food and misogyny go arm in arm (apparently all you need is a naked woman to entice a man to eat a burger) and some chains go one step further by comparing women to the food itself. In 2014, McDonalds UK used the catchphrase "tall, blonde and gorgeous" to advertise its French fries, suggesting that a chip contains all the qualities of an attractive, leggy Bond Girl. 

In the same year, Australian chain Grill'd threw subtlety out the window and openly compared a bikini-clad woman to a burger, pictured sunbathing on a towel of cheese, covered by a lettuce leaf. 

In one of Donald Trump's less memorable TV appearances, the billionaire-cum-president is pictured with ex-wife Ivana in a classy mansion. Like something out of a bad soap opera, they make stilted statements about something that is "so wrong but feels so right". A sordid romantic moment? Not this time, rather a bizarre way of eating pizza: from crust to centre. Launched in 1995, the ad was a springboard for Pizza Hut's infamous Stuffed Crust. 

3. When Burger King compared a sandwich to oral sex

We all know that sex sells, and fast food advertising is littered with subtle and not so subtle allusions to beef and buns. In 2009, a Singaporean Burger King ad faced outcry at its alleged depiction of oral sex. To promote a limited edition 7-inch burger, an advert was created featuring a wide-eyed, open-mouthed blonde facing the sandwich, with the tagline: "It’ll blow your mind away. Fill your desire for something long, juicy and flame-grilled with the New BK Super Seven Incher."

Complaints that  the advert was tasteless and misogynistic were further fuelled by a statement from the model in 2014, claiming that the image had been used without her knowledge. Burger King responded to complaints by blaming the local advertising agency who created the image, adding that it had received "positive" consumer response in Singapore. 

 4. When Doritos suggested that babies want crisps
 
 The struggle to keep young children away from deep fried corn and potato snacks may be real for parents, but in its 2016 Superbowl ad, Doritos suggested that a child's seemingly innate desire for begins in utero. The advert features a man eating Doritos during his partner's ultrasound, only to see the foetus visibly reaching for the snacks as they approach the womb. When the mother throws the crisp away in disgust, she suddenly goes into labour. The advert was instantly slammed as offensive and distasteful.

5. When Carl's Jr used Trump's wall to sell burgers

American burger chain Carl's Jr is renowned for its use of scantily-clad models to sell burgers. If nude models weren't enough, earlier this year the restaurant turned to controversial politics to spice up its advertising campaign. To promote its Tex-Mex burger, Carl's featured a volleyball game over Trump's proposed border wall. Cultural and racial stereotypes abound, with a good helping of sexism for good measure.  

 6. When McDonalds tried to convince Australia that its food was healthy
 
 McDonalds has taken great care in recent years to assure us that its food isn't as bad for us as its critics say. In 1980s Australia, the fast food giant went so far as to argue that a Big Mac, fries and milkshake was actually healthier and more nutritionally balanced than "the average Australian meal", containing  over 55% "of your daily protein needs". They just missed out the bit about saturated fat, salt and sugar. 

7. When KFC China suggested that chicken could solve armed conflict 

Fast food has historically relied on its speed and easy availability to entice customers, branding itself as food that can solve all manner of family crises. In Asia, it has even been suggested that Kentucky Fried Chicken could bring an end to war.

In this bizarre Taiwanese advert, some part of a deep-fried bird on a stick (suggestions on a postcard, please) is served to a raging army general, who makes sounds of delight. As a result, the two opposing sides seem to make peace and all enjoy their skewers together. Why not? 

8. When 7-Up encouraged mothers to lace children's milk with fizzy drinks

Sneaking a drop of whisky into a baby's milk to help them sleep was once considered acceptable parenting. As was mixing it with soda, apparently. In 1955, 7-Up suggested that mixing the fizzy lemon drink in "equal parts" to a toddler's milk was an excellent, responsible way of encouraging them to drink - assuring mothers that it was a "wholesome combination". 

9.  When KFC Australia was accused of 'racial insensitivity'

In this controversial advert, a white cricket supporter finds himself in an "awkward situation", surrounded by drumming West Indies fans. The solution? To offer a mixed bucket of KFC, which silences the music. "Too easy," comments the Aussie, with a wink. The advert received widespread criticism worldwide, although the fast food chain claimed that it had been "misinterpreted". 

10. When Pot Noodle compared itself to prostitutes
Pot Noodle has a history of controversial adverts in the UK, cashing in on its image as irresistibly bad food for boys.  This 2002 TV spot shows a man who is bored of his partner's bland snacks and in dire need of something more "dirty". He then goes to a red light district, asking women if they "do Pot Noodle".  In the final scene, the instant foodstuff is labelled "the slag of all snacks". The advert was banned after a record number of complaints were lodged by offended viewers. 

11. When KFC thought singing with your mouth full was entertaining

Arguably one of the most annoying fast food adverts of all time, this KFC TV spot depicts several emergency call centre workers who are quite literally singing the praises of the Zinger Chicken Salad, while still eating it. The 2005 advert enraged parents, who expressed concerns that KFC were encouraging bad manners in children. The Advertising Standards Authority received over 1675 complaints about it, the highest number since records began, but refused to ban it. 