Five ways to avoid a canapé catastrophe at weddings

I’ve got to use a dirty word today. Sorry, but there’s no way I can avoid it. Canapé. There we go. Positively disgusting, isn’t it?

But all the other options are diabolical, too. Nibbles? Coy. Hors d’oeuvres said in a silly accent? Pack it in. Eats? Bits? No. So for the time being we’re stuck with canapé as the least offensive. And that’s what we’re discussing today as we hurtle into wedding season. The canapé rules. 

Because weddings are made or broken on the strength of the canapés. You may think the big day is about love and celebrating the joy of two people who’ve pledged sickness and health and all that. But you’re wrong. Weddings are about whether there are enough chicken yakitori skewers and little bits of beef on mini Yorkshire puddings to go around. 

Perfect your position

First things first. Is there anything more miserable in life than being on the wrong side of a marquee, looking over at other guests across from you hoovering up canapés as if they’ve just returned from war?

There is not. So when you arrive at the reception, case the joint and work out where the kitchen is and where the food will be coming from. Do not move from this position.

Once, my friend Tash and I remained so rooted to a spot just outside the kitchen that the waiters started coming through the doors, lifting the trays high above their heads so we couldn’t reach them. Their ploy didn’t work because Tash merely launched herself into the air and swiped five mini-cheeseburgers with one hand. Bad, I know. But you’ve got several hours to kill between church and dinner and you need to plan accordingly. 

ace yourself

Next, that hideous moment when a tray comes along and you want to reach for a bit of Scotch egg but you’re standing with a group of thin people who are pretending not to be hungry so you have to shake your head and say “No thanks, not for me” even though you’re so hungry you could eat your own head.

Just have one. Don’t be a sheep. The canapés aren’t there to be looked at and the thin people will seethe inside. Just don’t take more than one canapé at a time from a tray because you are a grown-up at a wedding, not a three-year-old gorging on party rings. 

Messy mouthfuls

Thirdly, beware the canapé that requires more than one bite. And anything on big china spoons. Plus, gazpacho served in shot glasses. The dribble factor is perilously high. We’re not going to discuss bowl food because it should be illegal. Impossibly awkward to juggle a glass of champagne and a bowl of sausage and mash at the same time. 

Don't fight the fish

My mother has a “no fish” rule when eating canapés because she worries about breath. But 72 per cent of canapés are salmon-based. That’s why we have to eat farmed salmon these days, you know. The middle classes have been knocking back smoked salmon on little pancakes at weddings for so long that the wild stocks are decimated. So if you, like me, care more about your stomach than your breath I say dive into the fish and maybe have a quick swill with water in the Portaloos before dinner. 

Table manners

Finally, open your mouth properly. A simple enough thing, you might think. But I was at a party the other day when I reached for a bit of smoked salmon on rye bread and threw it towards my mouth like a seal in a circus trying to catch a fish. The rye bread made it; the salmon, covered in dill mayonnaise, hit my upper lip and fell on the carpet.

I had to conduct a highly undignified scrabble on the floor to peel it up, then hold the sticky bit of salmon in my hand while making polite conversation about Theresa May.

Even those of us with black belts in canapé-eating slip up sometimes. So open wide this summer.