Woman fell ill after discovering 'some type of animal' in her drink carton

A mother from New York says she was left severely ill after drinking from a carton of coconut water which she subsequently discovered contained a mysterious, squid-like substance.

Barbara Kline says she believes the substance was "some kind of animal" - and that she accidentally swallowed part of it when taking a swig of the Vita Coco Pure Coconut Water.

“I feel absolutely sick to my stomach even talking about it," she said.

“I know there is some type of animal in there.

“I’ve got told it looks like a mouse, I got told it looks like a squid, I got told it looks like a bunch of things – that’s why I would like for somebody to get it tested for me that has more authority than me.

“I understand that products get mouldy and products get mispackaged and sometimes spoil but this is just too much for me.”

Mrs Kline says the drink was well within its best-before date, and that it has been refrigerated since she'd brought it home.

“I took it out of my refrigerator. I shook it, I opened it, I put a straw in it and then I drank it," she said. “I immediately dumped out all the water. I shook it because I heard stuff bouncing around.

“I opened it with a knife and that’s when I discovered the octopus-looking thing.

“There were four of them all together, maybe five and I swallowed one of them.

"It was only when I unknowingly swallowed one of those clumps I realised it tasted awful I started vomiting. The diarrhoea honestly just stopped on Friday.”

She shared pictures of the substance on Facebook, which have since been shared thousands of times.

A spokesman for Vita Coco said: “We have been in touch with the consumer, Barbara Marie, multiple times since April 26, 2017.

“We take all consumer inquiries and product quality issues very seriously, and as a global brand have protocols to properly investigate quality inquiries.

“We asked Ms Marie for the product information for this unit on April 26, 2017, so that we could report the issue to quality control and investigate it further, but only received that information on Friday, May 5, 2017.

“As it stands now, we are reviewing Ms Marie’s claim thoroughly so we can assist her in the best manner possible.

“Vita Coco employs the highest standards of food safety at all its production facilities and our beverages are quality- and food safety-tested internally, and also by an external quality control specialist, before being distributed.

“However, because Vita Coco beverages do not contain preservatives, on rare occasion, random spoilage may occur.

“This is what we are investigating now with Ms Marie.”