Straight Up: Nobu Downtown, New York

Despite being over two years in the planning, my particular edition of Google Maps hadn’t got the memo about Nobu’s relocation from Tribeca to the heart of Wall Street. So despite definitely, definitely entering "Nobu Downtown" (the official name for this New York outpost of the famed Japanese restaurant - there's another on West 57th street) into the search, we still found ourselves flailing about the lower end of Hudson Street like the clueless tourists we were - a good 10 minute’s drive from the actual location at 195 Broadway, and that’s without the bumper-to-bumper traffic caused by late-night roadworks.

So it was that we arrived, flustered and late, to an almost-deserted bar (it was 10pm on a Monday and even Wall Street bankers don’t party that hard). But it’s testament to the magic of Nobu that within minutes we couldn’t have been more relaxed and content; a feeling that, thanks to magnetic bartender Chad and his unpredictable stream of libations, lasted well beyond closing time.

But first, the space itself. Nobu has taken over 12,500 square feet inside the “wedding cake” former AT&T building in the Financial District, with spectacular interiors by celebrated New York architect David Rockwell, who designed the original. The lower-ground floor houses the 154-seat restaurant; twice the size of the former restaurant, it’s a sea of rich red leather seating and plush banquettes upholstered in Japanese-patterned fabric, underneath an undulating wooden ceiling inspired by kirigami, which is supported by several abstract ash trees, a nod to the Tribeca original.

Upstairs, past the river rock wall and digital LED "pond", is the lounge and bar, where the building’s majestic proportions come into their own. Vast marble Doric columns flank the back-lit onyx circular bar, and original chandeliers hang from the nine-metre ceiling. The furnishings complement these impressive historic features, with bronze and glass lamps a nod to the art deco era in which the building was completed, while pops of colour come from Peruvian-inspired patchwork fabrics. A wooden sculpture designed by Rockwell Group and conceived by New York artist John Houshmand, which depicts swooshes of calligraphy ink and floats from the bar down the stairwell, is a dramatic final flourish.

The cocktail menu, like the surroundings, merges old and new. There are Nobu classics - Chad recommended a Lychee martini and a Pina martini to start, and both are expertly balanced and dangerously easy to drink - as well as more experimental drinks representative of “Nobu now”. A Nobu Sidecar, as my wobbly notes attest, has an unusually zesty finish thanks to the yuzu blended with orange liqueur and Japanese whisky, while the DT Cooler (El Dorado 3 Year rum, pineapple rum, campari, pineapple and yuzu) is a tasty mix of sweet and tart.

There’s plenty to love on the cocktail list, but the bartenders are willing to go off-piste: no ordering was necessary, as Chad scrutinised our reactions to each drink and chose the next round accordingly. Not everything we tried was on the menu, but it tasted all the better for the element of surprise.

Likewise the food: you can order from the main restaurant menu, which includes the famous Miso black cod, delectable sticky rice and Downtown-style, DIY hand rolls - but the standout dish of delicately battered sea bass was an off-menu special which, Chad assured us, he sweet-talked the chef into producing. Proof that in this town, it’s all about who you know. It might be the newest hotspot on the block but, with 23 years of experience behind it, Nobu Downtown never puts a foot wrong.