Move over Cadbury: here's the chocolate egg that explains the real meaning of Easter

80 million Easter eggs are sold annually in the UK, but increasing numbers fail to mention the word 'Easter' on the packaging.

It's a situation that has come to a head this week with the contentious decision to remove the word Easter from the annual Cadbury and National Trust egg hunt. The move prompted the Church of England to accuse the Trust's campaign of "airbrushing faith" from the religious festivities, while the Prime Minister labelled the rebrand as "ridiculous".

The Cadbury saga adds to the sense, long touted by campaigners, that Easter is losing its Christian message. A 2010 study found that over half of 6- to 10-year olds are unaware of the religious significance of Easter. A third of of the children asked thought it was a celebration of the Easter bunny's birthday.

There was also widespread confusion about the tradition of eating chocolate eggs, with respondents unaware that they are supposed to be a symbol of new life. 

To rectify the situation and teach children the true message behind Easter, the 'Real Easter Egg' was launched in 2010. Created by The Meaningful Chocolate Company, a Christian fair trade group, the Real Easter Egg is made from Fairtrade chocolate, features a 24-page Easter story booklet in each box and donates sales to charity.

This year, the special edition of the egg comes with an illustrated guide to Easter traditions.

David Marshall, founder of The Meaningful Chocolate Company, says the eggs are a way to reintroduce spirituality into the market again and teach children about the real meaning of Easter: "We've seen a trend in the removal of downgrading of any mention of Easter on packaging in recent years.

"The Real Easter Egg is the only egg that talks about faith in this way and in most supermarkets it will be the only charity Easter egg and the only egg of its type in the UK."

The company's website sells a range of eggs, including a dark chocolate version. There's also an 'Egg Hunt' product, which includes six mini chocolate eggs, a copy of the Easter activity book, and the word 'Easter' very clearly emblazoned on the logo. 